SOURCE: https://oaklandca.prelive.opencities.com/files/assets/city/v/1/housing-comm-dev/documents/rental-laws/info-sheet_rent-levels-and-rent-regulation_en_10.6.24_final.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03T19:35Z

CITY OF OAKLAND 
Rent Adjustment Program   
                                         
250 Frank H. Ogawa Plaza, Suite 5313 
Oakland, CA 94612  
(510) 238- 3721  
 
Info Sheet – Rent Levels and Rent Regulation – EN – 10.6.24  Page  1 | 3 
 
Rent Levels and Rent Regulation 
(O.M.C. 8.22.070 et seq.) 
 
Every residential rental unit in Oakland that is not exempt from the provisions of the Oakland 
Rent Adjustment Ordinance (“Ordinance”) has a lawful rent ceiling, which is the maximum 
amount of rent that a property owner may lawfully charge for the use or occupancy of the unit 
and any associated housing services, such as furnishings, parking, or laundry facilities. Rent is 
not limited to money and includes the fair market value of any goods or services that are 
rendered to a property owner in lieu of money. 
 
Under the Costa-Hawkins Rental Housing Act, a property owner may set the initial rent and 
associated housing services for new tenancies beginning on or after January 1, 1996. The initial 
rent becomes the new rent ceiling, which may be changed only by allowable increases under 
the Ordinance. Any change in housing services from that provided at the beginning of the 
tenancy may be grounds for an adjustment of the lawful rent ceiling. 
 
A property owner is NOT eligible to implement a vacancy increase for a unit that was cited by a 
governmental agency for serious health, safety, fire, or building code violations (except those 
caused by disasters) that remained uncorrected for more than 60 days before the vacancy.   
 
RENT CEILING INCREASES 
 
Rent ceilings may be increased by the allowable annual general consumer price index (“CPI 
increase”) rent increase without seeking approval from the Rent Adjustment Program (“RAP”). 
Each spring, the RAP publishes the CPI increase for the next fiscal year which runs from August 
1st through July 31st.   
 
An owner can increase the rent on a covered unit only once in a 12-month period. The first 
increase cannot be effective any earlier than 12 months after the tenant moved into the unit. 
No rent increase can be imposed until at least six (6) months after the tenant was first served 
with the RAP’s Notice of Existence of the Residential Rent Adjustment Program (“RAP Notice”) 
(O.M.C 8.22.060). 
 
If an owner does not increase the rent, or increases it less than the allowable CPI increase, the 
owner is entitled to “bank” the unused rent increase for the future. However, for units covered 
by the Oakland Rent Adjustment Ordinance, the total rent increase that can be imposed in any 
one banking increase may not exceed the total of three times the then allowable CPI.1 No rent 
increase may be banked more than ten (10) years after it accrues. 
 
To increase the rent, a property owner must give a tenant at least a 30-days’ written notice. If 
the tenant has a fixed-term lease, unless the lease allows the increase, the property owner will 
have to wait until the expiration of the lease term to implement the CPI increase. 
CITY OF OAKLAND 
Rent Adjustment Program   
                                         
250 Frank H. Ogawa Plaza, Suite 5313 
Oakland, CA 94612  
(510) 238- 3721  
 
Info Sheet – Rent Levels and Rent Regulation – EN – 10.6.24  Page  2 | 3 
 
Property Owner Petitions for Rent Adjustments 
 
Property owners may petition the RAP for rent ceiling increases, although with vacancy 
decontrol in effect, there is less need for such petitions. Grounds for filing a property owner 
petition include: 
 
• Capital Improvements: Costs paid by the owner for improvements to the unit or the building 
that materially add to the value of the property, appreciably prolong its useful life, and 
primarily benefit the tenants. An owner is entitled to pass through 70% of the allowable costs 
for expenditures made within 24 months of having filed the petition.  
 
• Uninsured Repair Costs: These costs are expenditures made to repair damage resulting from 
fire, earthquake, or natural disaster to the extent such repair is not reimbursed by insurance 
proceeds.  
 
• Increased Housing Service Costs: An owner can file a petition for a rent increase based on 
increased housing service costs to cover increased costs related to insurance, utilities, heat, 
water, and other services provided by the owner related to the use or occupancy of the unit. 
 
• Fair Return: An owner can file a petition for a rent increase based on fair return. Property 
owners are entitled to the opportunity to receive a fair return. Ordinarily, a fair return will be 
measured by maintaining the Net Operating Income (“NOI”) produced by the property in a base 
year, subject to CPI related adjustments. 
 
• Additional Occupants: An owner can file a petition for a rent increase up to 5% for additional 
occupants above the base occupancy level (the number of tenants allowed by the lease or 
rental agreement). 
 
Tenant Petitions for Rent Adjustments 
 
Tenants may petition the RAP for reductions in the rent ceiling, and do so most commonly 
because of housing code violations, habitability problems, or a decrease in living space or 
housing services. The petition process can be used to obtain rent reductions to compensate for 
such problems and to motivate a property owner to correct physical defects or restore space or 
services. Other grounds for filing a tenant petition include: 
 
• Unlawful Rent Increase: A rent increase on a tenancy subject to the Ordinance that exceeds the 
allowable CPI increase or a rent increase that is greater than 5% plus the percent change in cost 
of living. From August 2023 to July 2024, that amount is 8.8% in one year or greater than 30% 
over a five-year period (except for fair return). 
 
CITY OF OAKLAND 
Rent Adjustment Program   
                                         
250 Frank H. Ogawa Plaza, Suite 5313 
Oakland, CA 94612  
(510) 238- 3721  
 
Info Sheet – Rent Levels and Rent Regulation – EN – 10.6.24  Page  3 | 3 
• No RAP Notice: A rent increase notice was served without a RAP Notice. 
 
• Expiration of capital improvement amortization period. 
 
• Improper Service of the rent increase notice. 
 
HEARINGS 
 
After a tenant or a property owner files a petition, the opposing party has a right to object to 
the petition. If no objection is filed or if the petitioner does not request a hearing, and a Hearing 
Officer determines that a decision can be rendered without testimony, the petition will be 
decided administratively, that is, without a hearing. Otherwise, a hearing will be held, in which 
an impartial Hearing Officer takes testimony and receives written evidence on the issues raised 
by the petition. In either case, unless the parties enter into a settlement agreement, the 
Hearing Officer will issue a written decision granting or denying the requested rent ceiling 
increases or decreases. A Hearing Officer’s decision may be appealed to the seven-member 
Rent Board. 
 
 
1From August 1, 2024, to July 31, 2025, the highest banking allowed is 6.9%. 