SOURCE: https://oaklandca.prelive.opencities.com/files/assets/city/v/1/housing-comm-dev/documents/tenants/13608-cms.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03T19:35Z

INTRODUCED BY CITY ATTORNEY BARBARA J. PARKER, 
COUNCILMEMBER DAN KALB, AND 
COUNCILMEMBER NIKKI FORTUNATO BAS
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY
;ity Attorney's Office
As revised by the City Council at the July 14, 2020, City Council meeting
OAKLAND CITY COUNCIL
m*
ORDINANCE NO: C.M.S.
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 8.22 OF THE OAKLAND 
MUNICIPAL CODE (RESIDENTIAL RENT ADJUSTMENTS AND 
EVICTIONS) TO (1) LIMIT THE MAXIMUM RENT INCREASE IN ANY 
ONE YEAR TO CONFORM TO STATE LAW; (2) MAKE FAILURE TO 
PAY REQUIRED RELOCATION BENEFITS AN AFFIRMATIVE 
DEFENSE TO EVICTION; (3) LIMIT LATE FEES; (4) PROHIBIT 
UNILATERALLY IMPOSED CHANGES TO TERMS OF TENANCY; (5) 
ADD ONE-FOR-ONE REPLACEMENT OF ROOMMATES TO THE 
DEFINITION OF HOUSING SERVICES; (6) PROHIBIT EVICTION BASED 
ON ADDITIONAL OCCUPANTS IF LANDLORD UNREASONABLY 
REFUSED TENANT’S WRITTEN REQUEST TO ADD OCCUPANT(S); 
AND (7) STRENGTHEN TENANTS’ RIGHTS AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
TENANT’S RIGHTS UNDER THE TENANT PROTECTION ORDINANCE
WHEREAS, the City Council of Oakland regards tenant displacement as one of 
the most significant challenges facing the City and is dedicated to pursuing policies that 
promote housing security for inhabitants of all income levels and preserve the integrity 
and character of the Oakland community; and
WHEREAS, the Oakland City Attorney considers enforcement of the Tenant 
Protection Ordinance and vindication of tenants’ rights to be one of her top priorities;
and
WHEREAS, the Oakland City Attorney and local non-profit organizations have 
identified weaknesses in the Tenant Protection Ordinance that have allowed unethical 
landlords to evade accountability; and
WHEREAS, some landlords have engaged in an array of underhanded tactics to 
deny long-term occupants the legal protections of tenancy status; and
WHEREAS, some landlords have dishonestly threatened or claimed owner 
move-ins (OMIs) in order to recover and re-rent the unit at market rate; and
2834132v16

WHEREAS, certain incidents of bad faith behavior have occurred in residential 
rental housing that would have been actionable under the Tenant Protection Ordinance 
if not for exemptions in the Ordinance, and tenants deserve protection from harassment 
under the law regardless of the type of building or its ownership; and
WHEREAS, tenants in newly constructed rental property are also subject to 
harassment and should be entitled to the protections of this ordinance; and
WHEREAS, certain tenants are especially vulnerable to harassment and merit 
heightened protections based on their status as elderly, disabled, or catastrophically ill;
and
WHEREAS, violations of state housing and civil rights laws constitute tenant 
harassment and should be specifically prohibited by this ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the Oakland City Attorney has brought several Tenant Protection 
Ordinance lawsuits but found that the law lacks sufficient penalties to adequately punish 
violators and deter those who would consider engaging in similar harassment; and
WHEREAS, some landlords exploit the perceived documentation status of 
tenants and their guests in order to intimidate them; and
WHEREAS, a recent Rent Board decision held that a tenant may not file 
decreased housing services claim if the Owner refuses to permit a replacement 
roommate; and
WHEREAS, a number of other rent control jurisdictions, including San Francisco 
and Berkeley, recognize the right to replace roommates as a housing service; and
WHEREAS, adding the right to replace roommates to the definition of housing 
services will allow tenants to continue paying the same share of rent and keep their 
homes while providing affordable housing to the new occupants; and
WHEREAS, other jurisdictions also protect tenants from evictions based on 
unilaterally imposed changes of terms of tenancy; and
WHEREAS, the California Tenant Protection Act of 2019 provides a lower 
maximum rent increase than the Oakland Rent Adjustment Ordinance and protects 
tenants from eviction when an owner has failed to provide required relocation 
assistance; and
WHEREAS, Oakland Municipal Code Section 8.22.360.F, approved by the voters 
by the passage of Measure Y in November of 2018, authorizes the City Council to 
modify the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance (Measure EE) for the purpose of adding 
limitations on a landlord’s right to evict; and
-2-
2834132v16

WHEREAS, the City Council wishes to amend the Just Cause Ordinance to 
protect Oakland tenants facing evictions for violations of obligations not in the rental 
agreement at the commencement of tenancy and to add failure to make required 
relocation payments a defense to an eviction; and
WHEREAS, the City Council wishes to amend the Rent Adjustment Ordinance to 
change the maximum rent increase in any one year to 5 percent plus the Consumer 
Price Index change or 10 percent, whichever is lower, to conform to state law; and
WHEREAS, the City Council wishes to clarify the timing of required relocation 
payments for Ellis Act evictions and owner and relative move-in evictions; and
WHEREAS, in light of the increased housing pressures placed on low- and 
middle-income residents, the City Council finds that reasonable regulation of aspects of 
the landlord-tenant relationship is necessary to foster constructive communication, 
maintain an adequate supply of a variety of rental housing options, and protect the 
health, safety, and general welfare of the public; and
WHEREAS, this action is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act 
("CEQA") pursuant to sections of the CEQA Guidelines, taken together and each as a 
separate and independent basis, including but not limited to: Section 15378 (regulatory 
actions), Section 15060(c)(2) (no direct or reasonably foreseeable indirect physical 
change in the environment), and Section 15061(b)(3) (no significant environmental 
impact);
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OAKLAND DOES 
ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. Recitals: The City Council of the City of Oakland hereby 
determines that the preceding recitals are true and correct and an integral part of the 
Council’s decision to enact this legislation, and hereby adopts and incorporates them 
into this Ordinance.
SECTION 2. Repeal and Reenactment of Oakland Municipal Code 
Chapter 8.22, Article V, Tenant Protection Ordinance. Oakland Municipal Code 
Chapter 8.22, Article V, is hereby repealed in its entirety and reenacted with 
amendments as set forth in Attachment A (additions are shown as double underline 
and deletions are shown as a strikethrough).
SECTION 3. Repeal and Reenactment of Sections 8.22.020, 8.22.070, 
8.22.090, and 8.22.110, of Oakland Municipal Code Chapter 8.22, Article I 
(Residential Rent Adjustment Program). Oakland Municipal Code Sections 
8.22.020. 8.22.070, and-8.22.090, and 8.22.110 are hereby repealed and reenacted 
with amendments as set forth in Attachment B (additions are shown as double 
underline and deletions are shown as strikethrough).
SECTION 4. Repeal and Reenactment of Section 6 of Measure EE [O.M.C. 
Section 8.22.360 of Chapter 8.22, Article II (Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance)].
-3-
2834132v16

Oakland Municipal Code Section 8.22.360 is hereby repealed and reenacted with 
amendments as set forth in Attachment C (additions are shown as double underline 
and deletions are shown as strikethrough):
SECTION 5. Repeal and Reenactment of Sections 8.22.410 and 8.22.450 
of Oakland Municipal Code Chapter 8.22, Article III (Terminating Tenancy to 
Withdraw Residential Rental Units from the Rental Market). Oakland Municipal 
Code Sections 8.22.410 and 8.22.450 are hereby repealed and reenacted with 
amendments as set forth in Attachment D (additions are shown as double underline 
and deletions are shown as strikethrough).
SECTION 6. Repeal and Reenactment of Sections 8.22.810 and 8.22.820 
of Oakland Municipal Code Chapter 8.22, Article VII (Uniform Residential 
Tenant Relocation Ordinance). Oakland Municipal Code Section 8.22.810 is 
hereby repealed and reenacted with amendments as set forth in Attachment E 
(additions are shown as double underline and deletions are shown as strikethrough).
SECTION 7. Repeal and Reenactment of Section 8.22.850 of Oakland 
Municipal Code Chapter 8.22, Article VIII (Relocation Payments for Owner or 
Relative Move-Ins). Oakland Municipal Code Section 8.22.850 is repealed and 
reenacted with amendments as set forth in Attachment F (additions are shown as 
double underline and deletions are shown as strikethrough).
SECTION 8. Direction to the City Administrator. Within 90 days of adoption of 
the Ordinance, the City Administrator shall work with the Rent Adjustment Board to (1) 
develop amendments to the Rent Adjustment regulations that (a) conform the 
regulations to the changes hereby made to the Ordinance and (b) clarify the operation 
of rent increases for “Additional occupant(s)” under Section 8.22.020, including defining 
“principal residence” as used in the definition of “Base occupancy level” and providing a 
rent ceiling or maximum rent that a tenant may charge additional occupants not on the 
lease, and (2) develop regulations for the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance to clarify 
“reasonable refusal” as used in subsection 8.22.360.A.2.b. The City Administrator shall 
create a lease addendum form to be provided by the Rent Adjustment Program for use 
by property owners to track additional residents. In addition, by June 30, 2021, the City 
Administrator shall conduct an equity analysis of the Tenant Protection Ordinance, 
including the impacts on tenants and property owners, and provide a report of the 
findings to City Council’s Community & Economic Development Committee.
SECTION 9. Transition. The amendments herein to Chapter 8.22, Article I, 
shall not apply to any rent increase noticed on or before the effective date of this 
Ordinance.
SECTION 10. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or 
phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by 
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity 
of the remaining portions of the Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would 
have passed this Ordinance and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof
-4-
2834132v16

irrespective of the fact that one or more other sections, subsections, clauses or phrases 
may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 11. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective 
immediately on final adoption if it receives six or more affirmative votes; otherwise it 
shall become effective upon the seventh day after final adoption.
SECTION 12. CEQA Compliance. This action is exempt from the California 
Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA") pursuant to sections of the CEQA Guidelines, 
taken together and each as a separate and independent basis, including but not limited 
to: Section 15378 (regulatory actions), Section 15060(c)(2) (no direct or reasonably 
foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment), and Section 15061(b)(3) (no 
significant environmental impact). The legislation contains no provisions modifying the 
physical design, development, or construction of residential or nonresidential structures. 
Accordingly, it can be seen with certainty that there is no possibility that it: (1) may have 
a significant effect on the environment and/or (2) would result in any physical changes 
to the environment.
SECTION 13. No Effect on Emergency Ordinance. Nothing in this ordinance 
is intended to affect, supersede, or replace any protections provided by the Eviction 
Moratorium Emergency Ordinance (CMS 13589) enacted on March 27, 2020.
-5-
2834132v16

SECTION 14. Findings Regarding Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance 
Provided Pursuant to Civil Code Section 1946.2. The City Council finds that the Just 
Cause for Eviction Ordinance is consistent with Civil Code Section 1946.2 (as enacted 
by the Tenant Protection Act of 2019), and, in comparison to Civil Code Section 1946.2, 
further limits the reasons for termination of residential tenancy, provides additional 
tenant protections, and, in conjunction with other City ordinances, provides for higher 
relocation assistance amounts. The City Council finds that the Just Cause for Eviction 
Ordinance as amended herein is more protective than the provisions of Civil Code 
Section 1946.2.
JUL 2 1 imIN COUNCIL, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA,
PASSED BY THE FOLLOWING VOTE:
AYES - FORTUNATO BAS, GALLO, GIBSON MCELHANEY, KALB, REID, TAYLOR, THAO AND 
PRESIDENT KAPLAN _ ^
NOES- 
ABSENT- 
ABSTENTION
Introduction Date 
JUL 1 42028
0
0
ATTEST:
'ASHA REE1
Acting City Clerk and Clerk of the Council of the City of 
Oak and, California
Date of Attestation:
-6-
2834132v16

 
 
-7- 
2834132v16 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
 
Article V – Tenant Protection Ordinance  
 
8.22.600 - Tenant protection ordinance.  
 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Tenant Protection Ordinance" ("TPO").  
8.22.610 - Findings and purpose.  
 
A. There is a very significant demand for rental housing in Oak land leading to rising 
rents, caused in part by the spillover of increasingly expensive housing costs in 
San Francisco.  
B. Rents in Oakland increased twelve percent (12%) in 2012 and 15% in 2013 
(Source: East Bay Express, February 12-18, 2014, "The Rise of the New Land 
Lords," sourcing Oakland Department of Housing and Community Development). 
As noted by a February 8, 2014 Oakland Tribune article ("High prices sending 
Bay Area renters and homebuyers to outlying communities"), "Squeezed by 
astronomical home prices and rents that are almost as unaffordable, a growing 
number of Bay Area residents are pulling up stakes and trading long commutes 
for cheaper housing."  
C. According to Oakland Department of Housing and Community Dev elopment 
citing to Zillow Real Estate Research, the estimated rent for all homes in Oakland 
for June 2014 two thousand one hundred twenty-four dollars ($2,124.00) is 
nearly eleven percent (11%) higher than that for the same month last year 
($1,918.00), and rents have risen every month except for one (1) since January 
2013 (18 months total). If current patterns persist, the estimated rent for all 
homes in June 2015 will be two thousand three hundred eighty-six dollars 
($2,386.00). By comparison, the estimated median rent for all Oakland homes for 
June 2012 was $1,818.00, a thirty-one percent (31%) increase in only thirty-six 
(36) months.  
D. On September 12, 2014, the San Francisco Examiner reported t hat "San 
Francisco and Oakland have the distinction of having some of the highest rental 
rate increases in the nation for the month of August," with Oakland's rents 
increasing fourteen and four-tenths percent (14.4%) since last year, according to 
data collected by Trulia.  
E. The rising market demand for rental housing in Oakland creat es an incentive for 
some landlords to engage in harassing behavior or fail to make repairs to 
pressure existing tenants in rent controlled units to move so that rents can be 
raised. Existing remedies, such as petitioning the Rent Adjustment Program to 
restore a rental rate or order repairs, or employing an attorney at great cost to file 
a lawsuit to enforce state law of lease provisions, are insufficient deterrents to 
engaging in the illegal conduct in the first place.  
F. The imbalance between supply and demand creates an imbalance of bargaining 
power between landlords and tenants, which has resulted in many tenants, 
 
 
-8- 
2834132v16 
 
especially those not in rent controlled units, being unwilling or unable to assert 
their legal rights, which is detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of 
Oakland because the stability, security and quality of housing opportunities are 
reduced.  
G. The Rent Adjustment Program of fice of the City of Oakland has conservatively 
estimated receiving one hundred (100) to two hundred (200) complaints each 
month from tenants claiming landlord harassment, many of which are completely 
outside the jurisdiction of the Rent Adjustment Program.  
H. Numerous press articles have reported on the rise of tenant harassment 
throughout the Bay Area.  
I. Data from organizations providing services to low-income ren ters in Oakland, 
including East Bay Community Law Center and Centro Legal de la Raza, indicate 
that some of their clients live in housing with habitability problems and 
experience landlord harassment.  
J. Of the approximately four hundred eighty (480) Oakland tenan ts who received 
legal services at Centro Legal de la Raza during fiscal year 2014 (July 1, 2013 
through June 30, 2014), approximately forty percent (40%) faced harassment by 
their landlords. The forms of harassment varied, but included one or more of the 
following in each case:  
1. Interrupting, terminating, failing to provide or threatening  to interrupt, 
terminate or fail to provide housing services required by contract or by 
State, County or municipal housing, health or safety laws;  
2. Failing to perform required repairs and/or maintenance or th reatening to 
fail to do so;  
3. Failing to exercise due diligence in completing repairs and maintenance 
once undertaken or failing to follow appropriate industry repair, 
containment or remediation protocols designed to minimize exposure to 
noise, dust, lead paint, mold, asbestos, or other building materials with 
potentially harmful health impacts;  
4. Abusing the owner's right of access into a rental housing unit as that right 
is provided by law;  
5. Unlawfully removing from the rental unit personal property, furnishings, or 
any other items without the prior written consent of the tenant;  
6. Influencing, or attempting to influence, a tenant to vacate a rental unit 
through fraud, intimidation or coercion;  
7. Attempting to coerce a tenant to vacate with offer(s) of pay ments to 
vacate which ate accompanied with threats or intimidation;  
8. Threatening the tenant, by wo rd or gesture, with physical harm;  
9. Substantially and directly interfering with a Tenant's right  to quiet use and 
enjoyment of a rental housing unit as that right is defined by California 
law;  
 
 
-9- 
2834132v16 
 
10. Fraudulently refusing to acce pt or acknowledge receipt of a Tenant's 
lawful rent payment.  
K. A majority of Oakland residents are renters. The rental hous ing units in the City 
of Oakland include many subject to rent stabilization and some that are not. The 
cities of San Francisco, Santa Monica, West Hollywood, and East Palo Alto have 
each passed ordinances prohibiting various forms of harassment by landlords 
and their agents against tenants.  
L. The City Council of Oakland recognizes that displacement of tenants is a major 
concern and is interested in putting forth policies that help to maintain the ability 
of people in all income categories to live in our city. The increased housing 
pressures for residents across a range of lower and middle income levels 
warrants improved rent stabilization and tenant protection policies, as well as 
assessment of statutory damages against landlords who engage in tenant 
harassment. The City Council finds that reasonable regulation of aspects of the 
landlord-tenant relationship is necessary in order to foster constructive 
communication, maintain an adequate supply of a variety of rental housing 
options, and protect health, safety, and the general welfare of the public.  
M. The purpose of this policy is to deter harassing behavior by  landlords, to 
encourage landlords to follow the law and uphold their responsibility to provide 
habitable rental properties, and to give tenants and the City of Oakland legal 
recourse in instances where they tenants are subjected to harassing behavior by 
landlords.  
N. The provisions of the Tenant Protection Ordinance shall be c onstrued liberally for 
the accomplishment of its purposes. 
O. In order to carry out the pur poses of the Tenant Protection Ordinance and 
safeguard tenants’ rights against harassing behavior, the limitations period set 
out in Section 8.22.670.E of the Ordinance should be interpreted so as to 
promote the resolution of potentially meritorious claims.  
8.22.620 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, Article V: 
 
"Affordable housing provider" means an owner that provides hous ing in a building 
in which at least 80% of the units are restricted to occupancy at an affordable rent or 
an affordable housing cost for persons and families of low and moderate income as 
defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50093. The  terms "affordable 
rent" and "affordable housing cost" shall be as defined in Cali fornia Health and Safety 
Code Sections 50053 and 50052.5 and their implementing regulati ons. Such housing 
shall have terms of affordability equivalent to those prescribe d in California Health and 
Safety Code Sections 33334.3(f)(1)(A) for rental housing and 33 334.3(f)(1)(B) for 
owner occupied housing.  
 
"Catastrophically Ill" means Disabled and suffering from a life-threatening illness, as 
certified by the Tenant's primary care physician. 
 
 
-10- 
2834132v16 
 
“City Administrator” means the Oakland City Administrator or his or her designee. 
"City Attorney" means the Oakland City Attorney or his or her designee.  
"Elderly" means elderly as that term is defined in O.M.C. 8.22.410. 
"Disabled" means disabled as that term is defined in O.M.C. 8.22.410. 
"Health Facility" has the same meaning as in the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance 
(O.M.C. 8.22.340).  
"Owner" has the same meaning as “Landlord” in the Just Cause for Eviction 
Ordinance (O.M.C. 8.22.340).  
"Owner of Record" has the same meaning as in the Just Cause for Eviction 
Ordinance (O.M.C. 8.22.340).  
"Rent" has the same meaning as in the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance (O.M.C. 
8.22.340).  
"Rent Board" has the same meaning as in the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance 
(O.M.C. 8.22.340).  
"Rental Agreement" has the same meaning as in the Just Cause for Eviction 
Ordinance (O.M.C. 8.22.340).  
"Rental Unit" has the same meaning as in the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance 
(O.M.C. 8.22.340).  
"Tenant" has the same meaning as in the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance 
(O.M.C. 8.22.340)means any renter, tenant, subtenant, lessee, or sublessee of a rental 
unit, or any group of renters, tenants, subtenants, lessees, su blessees of a rental unit, 
or any other person entitled to the use or occupancy of such re ntal unit. This includes 
occupants of residential hotels against whom violations of California Civil Code Section 
1940.1 have occurred.   
"Skilled Nursing Facility" has the same meaning as in the Just Cause for Eviction 
Ordinance (O.M.C. 8.22.340).  
 
8.22.630 - Applicability and exemptions.  
 
A. The TPO shall apply to all R ental Units where there is a Rental Agreement 
between an Owner and one or more Tenants, unless exempted herein. The 
application of the TPO includes units that may not be covered under the Rent 
Adjustment Ordinance (O.M.C. 8.22.0100, et seq.) or the Just Cause for 
Eviction Ordinance (O.M.C. 8.22.300, et seq.)  
B. Exemptions.  
 1. Exemption for nonprofit owned rental housing. Any Rental Un it owned 
by (a) a corporation or organization exempt pursuant to United States 
Internal Revenue Code §501(c)(3) or any successor legislation 
 
 
-11- 
2834132v16 
 
exempting charitable organizations from federal income tax, (b) a 
limited partnership where the managing general partner is a 
corporation or organization exempt pursuant to United States Internal 
Revenue Code §501(c)(3) or any successor legislation exempting 
charitable organizations from federal income tax, or (c) a limited 
partnership where the managing general partner is a limited liability 
company whose sole members are corporations or organizations 
exempt pursuant to United States Internal Revenue Code §501(c)(3) or 
any successor legislation exempting charitable organizations from 
federal income tax shall have an exemption from the TPO's civil 
enforcement pursuant to this article. RESERVED. 
2. Rental Units in any Hospital , Skilled Nursing Facility, or Health Facility.  
3. Rental Units in a nonprofit fac ility that has the primary purpose of 
providing short term treatment, assistance, or therapy for alcohol, drug, 
or other substance abuse and the housing is provided incident to the 
recovery program, and where the client has been informed in writing of 
the temporary or transitional nature of the housing at its inception and 
is licensed for such purpose where such license is required.  
4. Rental Units in a nonprofit facility which provides a struct ured living 
environment that has the primary purpose of helping homeless 
persons obtain the skills necessary for independent living in permanent 
housing and where occupancy is restricted to a limited and specific 
period of time of not more than twenty-four (24) months and where the 
client has been informed in writing of the temporary or transitional 
nature of the housing at its inception and is licensed for such purpose 
where such license is required.  
5. Rental Units exempted from Part 4, Title 4, Chapter 2 of the  California 
Civil Code (CCC) by CCC § 1940(b) (transient occupancy in 
hotels/motels) unless the Owner violates CCC § 1940.1 to avoid 
tenancy status. In those circumstances, the specific Rental Units 
where such violations have taken place shall not be exempt. 
6. Reserved.  
7. A rental unit in a newly constructed residential property th at has a 
certificate of occupancy issued after the effective date of O.M.C. 
8.22.600, et seq. For the purposes of this exemption, "newly 
constructed" means all units on the parcel were built from the ground 
up under the same certificate of occupancy and not converted from 
property previously used for non-residential purposes. In the event the 
property is not issued a certificate of occupancy, then the exemption 
starts on the date that the last building related permit is finalized, if 
after the effective date of O.M.C. 8.22.600, et seq. This exemption is a 
limited duration exemption and expires fifteen (15) years from the date 
the exemption commences.  
 
 
-12- 
2834132v16 
 
 
8.22.640 - Tenant harassment.  
 
A. No Owner or such Owner's agent, contractor, subcontractor, o r employee, shall 
do any of the following, in bad faith. Subsections 15 and 17-21 shall apply 
beginning April 21, 2020. 
1. Interrupt, terminate, or fail  to provide housing services required by 
contract or by State, County or municipal housing, health or safety laws, 
or threaten to do so;  
2. Fail to perform repairs and maintenance required by contract  or by State, 
County or municipal housing, health or safety laws, or threaten to do so;  
3. Fail to exercise due diligenc e in completing repairs and maintenance 
once undertaken or fail to follow appropriate industry repair, containment 
or remediation protocols designed to minimize exposure to noise, dust, 
lead paint, mold, asbestos, or other building materials with potentially 
harmful health impacts;  
4. Abuse the Owner's right of access into a rental housing unit  as that right 
is provided by law;  
5. Remove from the Rental Unit personal property, furnishings, or any other 
items without the prior written consent of the Tenant, except when done 
pursuant to the procedure set forth in Civil Code section 1980, et seq. 
(disposition of Tenant's property after termination of tenancy).  
6. Influence or attempt to influence a Tenant to vacate a Renta l Unit through 
fraud, intimidation or coercion. This , which shall includes threatening to 
report a Tenant or other person known to the Owner to be associated 
with a Tenant to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcementany local, 
state, or federal agency on the basis of their perceived or actual 
immigration status., though that  The prohibition shall not be construed as 
preventing communication with U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement such agencies regarding an alleged immigration violation;  
7. Offer payments to a Tenant to vacate more than once in six ( 6) months, 
after the Tenant has notified the Owner in writing the Tenant does not 
desire to receive further offers of payments to vacate;  
8. Attempt to coerce a Tenant to vacate with offer(s) of paymen ts to vacate 
which are accompanied with threats or intimidation. This shall not include 
settlement offers made in good faith and not accompanied with threats or 
intimidation in pending eviction actions;  
9. Threaten the tenant Tenant or their guests, by word or gestu re, with 
physical harm;  
10. Substantially and directly interfere with a Tenant's right to quiet use and 
enjoyment of a rental housing unit as that right is defined by California 
law;  
 
 
-13- 
2834132v16 
 
11. Refuse to accept or acknowledge receipt of a Tenant's lawfu l rent 
payment, except as such refusal may be permitted by state law after a 
notice to quit has been served on the Tenant and the time period for 
performance pursuant to the notice has expired;  
12. Refuse to cash a rent check or money order for over thirty (30) days 
unless a written receipt for payment has been provided to the Tenant, 
except as such refusal may be permitted by state law after a notice to quit 
has been served on the Tenant and the time period for performance 
pursuant to the notice has expired;  
13. Interfere with a Tenant's r ight to privacy. This includes, but is not limited 
to: video or audio recording that captures the interior of a Tenant’s unit, 
entering or photographing portions of a Rental Unit that are beyond the 
scope of a lawful entry or inspection, unreasonable inquiry into a Tenant’s 
relationship status or criminal history, and unreasonable restrictions on or 
inquiry into overnight guests; 
14. Request information that viola tes a Tenant's right to privacy, including but 
not limited to residence or citizenship status or social security number, 
except as required by law or, in the case of a social security number, for 
the purpose of obtaining information for the qualifications for a tenancy, 
or not release such information except as required or authorized by law. 
This includes a refusal to accept equivalent alternatives to information or 
documentation that does not concern immigration or citizenship status, 
e.g. an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN);  
15. Other repeated acts or omissions of such significance as to  substantially 
interfere with or disturb the comfort, repose, peace or quiet of any person 
lawfully entitled to occupancy of such dwelling unit and that cause, are 
likely to cause, or are intended to cause any person lawfully entitled to 
occupancy of a dwelling unit to vacate such dwelling unit or to surrender 
or waive any rights in relation to such occupancy Unilaterally impose or 
require an existing tenant to agree to new material terms of tenancy or a 
new rental agreement, unless: (1) the change in the terms of the tenancy 
is authorized by the Rent Adjustment Ordinance or California Civil Code 
Sections 1946.2(f),1947.5, or 1947.12, or required by federal, state, or 
local law or regulatory agreement with a government agency; or (2) the 
change in the terms of the tenancy was accepted in writing by the Tenant 
after receipt of written notice from the Owner that the Tenant need not 
accept such new term as part of the rental agreement;  
16. Removing a housing service f or the purpose of causing the Tenant to 
vacate the Rental Unit. For example, taking away a parking space 
knowing that a Tenant cannot find alternative parking and must move; 
17. Engage in conduct that violates California Civil Code Secti on 789.3, 
including but not limited to an illegal lockout and utility shutoff;  
18.  Violate the Unruh Civil Rights Act (California Civil Code 51 et seq.); 
 
 
-14- 
2834132v16 
 
19.  Commit elder financial abuse as defined by California Welf are and 
Institutions Code 15610.30 et seq. of a Tenant; 
20.  Misrepresent to a Tenant that they are required to vacate a Rental Unit or 
otherwise entice a Tenant to vacate a Rental Unit through 
misrepresentations or concealment of material facts;  
21. Force a Tenant to vacate their Rental Unit and reregister i n order to avoid 
classification as a tenant under Civil Code 1940.1. Forced vacation can 
be implied from the totality of the circumstances;  
22.  Other repeated acts or omissions of such significance as t o substantially 
interfere with or disturb the comfort, repose, peace or quiet of any person 
lawfully entitled to occupancy of such dwelling unit and that cause, are 
likely to cause, or are intended to cause any person lawfully entitled to 
occupancy of a dwelling unit to vacate such dwelling unit or to surrender 
or waive any rights in relation to such occupancy.  
B. Retaliation Prohibited. Retaliation against a Tenant because  of the Tenant's 
exercise of rights under the TPO is prohibited. Retaliation claims may only be 
brought in court and may not be addressed administratively. A court may 
consider the protections afforded by the TPO in evaluating a claim of retaliation.  
C. Evictions. Nothing in the TPO shall be construed as to preve nt an Owner from 
lawfully evicting a Tenant pursuant to state law or Oakland's Just Cause for 
Eviction Ordinance. (O.M.C. 8.22.300, et seq.).  
D. Rent Adjustments. Nothing in th e TPO shall be construed as to prevent an 
Owner from lawfully increasing a Tenant's rent pursuant to state law or Oakland's 
Rent Adjustment Ordinance (O.M.C. 8.22.100, et seq.), and such increases shall 
not be deemed violations of Section 8.22.640 of the TPO.  
E. Notice to Tenants.  
1. Commencement.  
a. For Rental Units covered by the Rent Adjustment Ordinance th e 
Notice at Commencement of Tenancy required by O.M.C. 8.22.060 
shall include a reference to the TPO.  
b. For all Rental Units that are not covered by the Rent Adjust ment 
Ordinance, Owners are required to provide a notice regarding the 
TPO to all Tenants using the required form prescribed by the City 
staff.  
2. Common area. If Rental Units subject to this ordinance are l ocated in a 
building with an interior common area that all of the building's Tenants 
have access to, the Owner must post a notice in at least one (1) such 
common area in the building via a form prescribed by the City staff.  
F. Repairs and maintenance. Noth ing in the TPO shall be construed as requiring 
different timelines or standards for repairs or maintenance, as required by 
 
 
-15- 
2834132v16 
 
contract or State, County or municipal housing, health, and safety laws, or 
according to appropriate industry protocols.  
G.  Severances Prohibited. The fo llowing amenities, supplied in connection with use 
or occupancy of a rental unit, may not be severed from a tenancy without good 
cause: (1) Garage facilities, parking facilities, driveways, storage spaces, laundry 
rooms, decks, patios, or gardens on the same lot; (2) kitchen facilities, toilet 
facilities, or lobbies in residential hotels.  For purposes of this subsection, good 
cause shall include (1) requirement by federal, state, or local law, such as O.M.C. 
Chapter 15.27, (2) acceptance of the severance in writing by the Tenant after 
receipt of written notice from the Owner that the Tenant need not accept the 
severance, (3) ownership by an affordable housing provider as defined by 
Section 8.22.620 where either (a) the severance is unavoidable in order for the 
addition of one or more new affordable housing units to proceed and the owner 
has obtained all necessary permits for constructing the additional unit(s) or (b) 
the severance results from the removal of a balcony for which repair or removal 
was necessary for safety and the owner has obtained all necessary permits for 
the removal, (4) addition of one or more Accessory Dwelling Units (as defined by 
Government Code Section 65852.2(j)(1), provided that the owner has obtained 
all necessary permits for constructing the additional unit(s) and the severance is 
not of a garage facility, parking facility, or driveway more than one-half mile from 
a designated transit hub, or a laundry room, and is unavoidable in order for the 
addition of the unit(s) to proceed, and (5) other good cause as provided by 
regulation, adopted in the same manner as provided by Rent Adjustment 
Program Regulation Section 8.22.040.B.4.b. A severance does not include 
noticed temporary unavailability of the above housing services in order to 
perform necessary work with all required permits. For units covered under the 
Rent Adjustment Ordinance, any severance permitted under this Section shall be 
offset by a corresponding reduction in rent. Either an owner or a tenant may file a 
petition with the Rent Adjustment Program to determine the amount of the rent 
reduction.  This subsection shall apply beginning April 21, 2020.  
H.  Late payment fees. Late fees may not be imposed except if p rovided for in a 
written rental agreement. Notwithstanding any lease provision to the contrary, 
fees for late payment of rent shall not exceed a total of three (3) percent of the 
monthly rent for each payment of rent and may only be applied for rent which is 
five or more days overdue. This subsection shall only apply if the applicable 
written rental agreement was entered into or renewed on or after April 16, 2020. 
8.22.650 - General remedies. 
 
A. Violations of the TPO. Violati ons of section 8.22.640 may be enforced by civil 
remedies as set forth in this section or as otherwise specifically set out in this 
O.M.C article.  
B. Notice requirement for Tenants. Before a Tenant may file an a civil suit alleging a 
violation of subsection 8.22.640.A.1., 2., 3., 10., 11., 12., or 13., the affected 
Tenant must first notify the Owner or his or her designated agent regarding the 
 
 
-16- 
2834132v16 
 
problem. If the allegation is a violation of subsections 8.22.640.A.1., 2., 3.,11., or 
12., the Tenant must allow fifteen (15) days for the Owner to correct the  
problem, unless the Owner notifies the Tenant that the repairs will take more 
than fifteen (15) days and provides for a reasonable time period for completion. If 
the repair takes more than fifteen (15) days, the Tenant may file the civil suit if 
the Owner does not take reasonable steps to commence addressing the problem 
or the Owner does not follow through to complete the repairs with reasonable 
diligence. However, no fifteen (15) day waiting period shall apply if the Owner’s 
conduct is intentional and demonstrates a willful disregard for the comfort, safety 
or wellbeing of the Tenant(s).   
C. In addition to the remedies p rovided in the TPO, a violator is liable for such costs, 
expenses, and disbursements paid or incurred by the City in abatement and 
prosecution of the violation.  
D. The remedies available in the TPO are not exclusive and may be used 
cumulatively with any other remedies in this chapter or at law.  
8.22.660 - Reserved. 
  
8.22.670 - Civil remedies.  
 
A. General Civil Remedies.  
1. Enforcement by Aggrieved-Tenant. An aggrieved Tenant may bri ng a civil 
action for any combination of injunctive equitable relief, actual or statutory  
or damages, or both and restitution, for any violation of 8.22.540640.  
2. Enforcement by City Attorney. The City Attorney may enforce the TPO 
through civil action for injunctive equitable relief, restitution, and/or 
damages penalties, or both, for when the party against whom enforcement 
is sought has a pattern and practice of violating the TPO. A court may 
award civil penalties of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for 
each violation of subsection 8.22.640A., B., E., G., or H.  A court may 
award punitive damages in a proper case as set out in Civil Code Section 
3294 and pursuant to the standards set forth in that Code Section or any 
successor thereto. The City Attorney may also request that an 
administrative citation or civil penalty be issued by the City. The City 
Attorney has the sole discretion to determine the cases appropriate for 
enforcement by the City Attorney's Office.  
B. Treble and Exemplary Special Damages.  
1. Tenant Enforcement.  
a.  Any person who violates, aids, or incites another person to  violate 
subsection 8.22.640.A, or E., G., or H. is liable in a court action for 
each and every such offense for money damages of not less than 
three times actual damages suffered by an aggrieved Tenant 
(including damages for mental or emotional distress), or for 
minimum damages in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), 
 
 
-17- 
2834132v16 
 
whichever is greater, and whatever other relief the court deems 
appropriate. In the case of an award of damages for mental or 
emotional distress, said award shall only be trebled if the trier of 
fact finds that the Owner acted in knowing violation of or in reckless 
disregard of the TPO.  
b.  Any person who violates, aids, or incites another person to  violate 
subsection 8.22.640A., E., G., or H. with respect to Elderly or 
Disabled Tenants is liable in a court action for each and every such 
offense for money damages of no less than three times the actual 
damages suffered by the aggrieved Tenant(s) (including damages 
for mental or emotional distress), or for minimum damages of two 
thousand dollars ($2,000.00), whichever is greater. 
c. Any person who violates, aids , or incites another person to violate 
subsection 8.22.640A., E., G., or H. with respect to Catastrophically 
Ill Tenants is liable in a court action for each and every such 
offense for money damages of no less than three times the actual 
damages suffered by the aggrieved Tenant(s) (including damages 
for mental or emotional distress), or for minimum damages of two 
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), whichever is greater.  
d. A Tenant may only receive one form of heightened penalties a s 
between Elderly, Disabled, and Catastrophically Ill.  
e. Any violation of subsection 8.22.640A.6 for threatening to r eport a 
Tenant or other person known to the Owner to be associated with a 
Tenant on the basis of their perceived or actual immigration status 
is liable in a court action for each and every such offense for money 
damages of no less than three times the actual damages suffered 
by the aggrieved Tenant(s) (including damages for mental or 
emotional distress), or for minimum damages of two thousand 
dollars ($2,000.00), whichever is greater. 
2f. A court may award punitive d amages in a proper case as set out in 
Civil Code Section 3294 and pursuant to the standards set forth in 
that Code Section or any successor thereto, but may not award 
both punitive damages and treble damages.  
C. Injunctive Equitable Relief.  
Any person who commits an act, proposes to commit an act, or engages in any 
pattern and practice which violates the TPO may be enjoined therefrom by any 
court of competent jurisdiction. A court may make such orders or judgments, 
including the appointment of a receiver, as may be necessary to prevent the use 
or employment by any person of any practice which violates this ordinance or as 
may be necessary to restore to any person in interest any money or property, 
real or personal, which may have been acquired through practices that violate 
this ordinance. An action for injunction equitable relief under this subsection may 
be brought by any aggrieved Tenant, by the City Attorney (for a pattern and 
 
 
-18- 
2834132v16 
 
practice only), or by an aggrieved Tenant who will fairly and adequately represent 
the interest of the protected class.  
D. Attorney's Fees and Costs  
1. Action by City Attorney. In any administrative, civil, or special proceeding 
brought pursuant to the TPO, the City may, at the initiation of the 
proceeding, seek an award of attorney's fees. If the City seeks an award 
of attorney's fees, the award shall be made to the prevailing party. 
Provided however, that no award may be made to a prevailing party that 
exceeds the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City in 
the action or proceeding. Court costs may be awarded to a prevailing 
party pursuant to state law.  
2. Action by Tenant. In any civil action brought pursuant to th e TPO, the 
prevailing Tenant is entitled to recover the Tenant’s reasonable attorney's 
fees. A defendant Owner may recover reasonable attorney's fees if the 
complaint brought by the Tenant was devoid of merit and brought in bad 
faith. Court costs may be awarded to a prevailing party pursuant to state 
law.  
3. Costs of Investigation. In the event the City Attorney bring s an 
administrative, civil, or special proceeding pursuant to the TPO, the City 
Attorney may recover its costs of investigation.  
E.  Statute of Limitations. The statute of limitations for an a ction shall be three years, 
and all remedies under the Ordinance are available for the entire statutory 
period. 
 
 
8.22.680 - Miscellaneous.  
 
A. Regulations and Forms. The Rent Board has the authority to m ake such 
regulations to implement this O.M.C. Chapter 8.22 Article V as are not 
inconsistent with the TPO, provided, however, that if the Rent Board has not 
issued initial regulations within such time as the City Council may proscribe, the 
City Administrator is authorized to make interim regulations.  
Within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the TPO, the City Administrator 
shall develop forms to implement subsection 8.22.640.E. Any changes to the 
initial forms shall be effective thirty (30) days after they are made available to the 
public at the Rent Adjustment Program offices, unless the City Administrator 
makes a finding that an earlier or later date is necessary. All Forms required by 
the TPO are vital communication documents and shall be translated and 
distributed in accordance with the Equal Access to Services Ordinance, O.M.C 
Chapter 2.30.  
B. Non-waiverability. Any provision, whether oral or written, i n or pertaining to a 
rental agreement whereby any provision of the TPO is waived or modified, is 
against public policy, and void, and unenforceable.  
 
 
-19- 
2834132v16 
 
ATTACHMENT B  
Residential Rent Adjustment Program 
 
8.22.020 - Definitions.  
 
As used in this chapter, Article l:  
"1946 notice" means any notice of termination of tenancy served pursuant to California 
Civil Code Section 1946. This notice is commonly referred to as a thirty (30) or sixty (60) 
day notice of termination of tenancy, but the notice period may actually be for a longer 
or shorter period, depending on the circumstances.  
"1946 Termination of tenancy" means any termination of tenancy pursuant to California 
Civil Code § 1946.  
“Additional occupant” means an occupant whose addition to the unit has increased the 
total number of occupants above the base occupancy level. The owner may petition to 
increase the rent by an amount up to 5% for each additional occupant above the base 
occupancy level.  A rent increase shall not be based on an additional occupant who is 
the spouse, registered domestic partner, parent, grandparent, child, adopted child, 
foster child, or grandchild of an existing tenant, or the legal guardian of an existing 
tenant’s child or grandchild who resides in the unit, or a caretaker/attendant as required 
for a reasonable accommodation for an occupant with a disability. A rent increase 
granted under this Section shall be reversed if the number of occupants decreases. 
"Anniversary date" is the date falling one year after the day the tenant was provided with 
possession of the covered unit or one year after the day the most recent rent 
adjustment took effect, whichever is later. Following certain vacancies, a subsequent 
tenant will assume the anniversary date of the previous tenant (Section 8.22.080). 
"Appeal panel" means a three-member panel of board members authorized to hear 
appeals of Hearing Officer decisions. Appeal panels must be comprised of one 
residential rental property owner, one tenant, and one person who is neither a tenant 
nor a residential rental property owner. Appeal panels may be made up of all regular 
board members, all alternates, or a combination of regular board members and 
alternates.  
"Banking" means any CPI Rent Adjustment (or any rent adjustment formerly known as 
the Annual Permissible Rent Increase) the owner chooses to delay imposing in part or 
in full, and which may be imposed at a later date, subject to the restrictions in the 
regulations.  
“Base occupancy level” means the number of tenants occupying the covered unit as 
principal residence as of June 16, 2020, with the owner’s knowledge, or allowed by the 
lease or rental agreement effective as of June 16, 2020, whichever is greater, except 
that, for units that had an initial rent established on or after June 17, 2020, “base 
occupancy level” means the number of tenants allowed by the lease or rental 
agreement entered into at the beginning of the current tenancy. 
"Board" and "Residential Rent Adjustment Board" means the Housing, Residential Rent 
and Relocation Board.  
 
 
-20- 
2834132v16 
 
"Capital improvements" means those improvements to a covered unit or common areas 
that materially add to the value of the property and appreciably prolong its useful life or 
adapt it to new building codes. Those improvements must primarily benefit the tenant 
rather than the owner. Capital improvement costs that may be passed through to 
tenants include seventy percent (70%) of actual costs, plus imputed financing. Capital 
improvement costs shall be amortized over the useful life of the improvement as set 
forth in an amortization schedule developed by the Rent Board. Capital improvements 
do not include the following as set forth in the regulations: correction of serious code 
violations not created by the tenant; improvements or repairs required because of 
deferred maintenance; or improvements that are greater in character or quality than 
existing improvements (“gold-plating” “over-improving”) excluding: improvements 
approved in writing by the tenant, improvements that bring the unit up to current building 
or housing codes, or the cost of a substantially equivalent replacement; or costs for 
which a landlord is reimbursed (e.g., insurance, court awarded damages, subsidies, tax 
credits, and grants.). 
"CPI—All items" means the Consumer Price Index—All items for all urban consumers 
for the San Francisco—Oakland—San Jose area as published by the U.S. Department 
of Labor Statistics for the twelve (12) month period ending on the last day of February of 
each year.  
"CPI—Less shelter" means the Consumer Price Index—All items less shelter for all 
urban consumers for the San Francisco—Oakland—San Jose area as published by the 
U.S. Department of Labor Statistics for the twelve (12) month period ending on the last 
day of February of each year.  
"CPI Rent Adjustment" means the maximum rent adjustment (calculated annually 
according to a formula pursuant to Section 8.22.070 B.3) that an owner may impose 
within a twelve (12) month period without the tenant being allowed to contest the rent 
increase, except as provided in Section 8.22.070B.2 (failure of the owner to give proper 
notices, decreased housing services, and uncured code violations).  
"Costa-Hawkins" means the California state law known as the Costa-Hawkins Rental 
Hawkins Act codified at California Civil Code § 1954.50, et seq. (Appendix A to this 
chapter contains the text of Costa-Hawkins).  
"Covered unit" means any dwelling unit, including joint living and work quarters, and all 
housing services located in Oakland and used or occupied in consideration of payment 
of rent with the exception of those units designated in Section 8.22.030A as exempt.  
"Ellis Act Ordinance" means the ordinance codified at O.M.C. 8.22.400 (Chapter 8.22, 
Article III) setting out requirements for withdrawal of residential rental units from the 
market pursuant to California Government Code § 7060, et seq. (the Ellis Act).  
"Fee" means the Rent Program Service Fee as set out in O.M.C. 8.22.500 (Chapter 
8.22, Article IV).  
"Housing services" means all services provided by the owner related to the use or 
occupancy of a covered unit, including, but not limited to, insurance, repairs, 
maintenance, painting, utilities, heat, water, elevator service, laundry facilities, janitorial 
service, refuse removal, furnishings, parking, security service, and employee services, 
 
 
-21- 
2834132v16 
 
and any other benefits or privileges permitted the tenant by agreement, whether 
express or implied, including the right to have a specific number of occupants and the 
right to one-for-one replacement of roommates, regardless of any prohibition against  
subletting and/or assignment. 
“Mandatory Seismic Capital Improvement” means Capital Improvements that consist of 
mandatory seismic retrofitting as required in O.M.C. Chapter 15.27.  Allowable 
adjustments of rents for work required by O.M.C. Chapter 15.27 shall be governed by 
Article 1. Chapter 8.22.  
"Owner" means any owner, lessor or landlord, as defined by state law, of a covered unit 
that is leased or rented to another, and the representative, agent, or successor of such 
owner, lessor or landlord.  
"Owner of record" means a natural person, who is an owner of record holding an 
interest equal to or greater than thirty-three percent (33%) in the property, but not 
including any lessor, sublessor, or agent of the owner of record.  
"Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance" means the ordinance adopted by the voters on 
November 5, 2002 (also known as Measure EE) and codified at O.M.C. 8.22.300 
(O.M.C. Chapter 8.22, Article II).  
"Rent" means the total consideration charged or received by an owner in exchange for 
the use or occupancy of a covered unit including all housing services provided to the 
tenant.  
"Rent Adjustment Program" means the department in the city that administers this 
chapter and also includes the board.  
"Regulations" means the regulations adopted by the board and approved by the City 
Council for implementation of this chapter, Article I (formerly known as "Rules and 
Procedures") (After regulations are approved, they will be attached to this chapter as 
Appendix B).  
"Security deposit" means any payment, fee, deposit, or charge, including but not limited 
to, an advance payment of rent, used or to be used for any purpose, including but not 
limited to the compensation of an owner for a tenant's default in payment of rent, the 
repair of damages to the premises caused by the tenant, or the cleaning of the premises 
upon termination of the tenancy exclusive of normal wear and tear.  
"Tenant" means a person entitled, by written or oral agreement to the use or occupancy 
of any covered unit.  
"Uninsured repairs" means that work done by an owner or tenant to a covered unit or to 
the common area of the property or structure containing a covered unit which is 
performed to secure compliance with any state or local law as to repair damage 
resulting from fire, earthquake, or other casualty or natural disaster, to the extent such 
repair is not reimbursed by insurance proceeds. 
“Voluntary Seismic Capital Improvement” means Capital Improvements that consist of 
“seismic strengthening” as defined in O.M.C. Section 15.30.100, but is not required for 
compliance under Chapter 15.27. 
 
 
-22- 
2834132v16 
 
8.22.070 - Rent adjustments for occupied covered units.  
 
This section applies to all rent adjustments for continuously occupied covered units. (Rent 
increases following vacancies of covered units are governed by Section 8.22.080). Any 
rent increase for a continuously occupied covered unit must comply with this section.  
A.  One Rent Increase Each 12 Months; Exceptions and Limitation s.  
1.  One Rent Increase Each Twelve (12) Months.  
a.  Except as provided in Paragraph b below, an Owner may incre ase the 
rent on a covered unit occupied continuously by the same tenant  only 
once in a 12-month period. If an Owner filed an Owner's Rent In crease 
petition, the earliest any increase allowed in the Hearing Offi cer's 
decision may be effective is the date that a rent increase noti ce 
consistent with this Chapter and state law is served on the Ten ant after 
the service date of the decision. Such rent increase cannot tak e effect 
earlier than the tenant's anniversary date if the Owner has alr eady 
increased that tenant's rent within the preceding 12-month period.  
b.  Upon the occurrence of any of the following, an Owner may i ncrease the 
Rent on a Covered Unit occupied continuously by the same Tenant, even 
if rent has already been raised during the preceding twelve (12) months:  
i.  If the Owner restores housing services, rent may be restore d to the 
original Rent from the level to which rent had been decreased a fter 
a rent decrease awarded in a hearing decision by the RAP for 
housing services; and/or  
ii.  If, as a result of an appeal to the Rent Board or a writ t o the Superior 
Court, the final decision permits a Rent increase greater than that 
allowed in the Hearing Officer's decision, the Owner may notice such 
increase as of the date of the final decision.  
2.  In no event may rent for any covered unit increase by more than ten percent 
in any 12-month period by more than 10 percent, or  the amount permitted 
for Oakland rental units subject to California Civil Code 1947. 12 (or 
successor provisions), whichever is lower, for any and all rent  increases 
based on the CPI Rent Adjustment, as set out in O.M.C. 8.22.070B (CPI Rent 
Adjustment), and any justifications pursuant to O.M.C. 8.22.070 C.2 (Rent 
Increases In Excess of CPI Rent Adjustment) except for the foll owing: if 
required for the owner to obtain a fair return pursuant to O.M. C. 
8.22.070C.1.d. 
a.  A rent increase based on the CPI Rent Adjustment for the cu rrent year 
that exceeds ten percent, provided however that such Rent increase may 
only include a CPI Rent Adjustment;  
b.  The rent increase is required for the owner to obtain a fai r return 
pursuant to O.M.C. 8.22.070C.2.f.  
 
 
-23- 
2834132v16 
 
3.  No series of rent increases in any five-year period can exc eed 30 percent 
for any rent increases based on the CPI Rent Adjustment, as set  out in, 
O.M.C. 8.22.070B (CPI Rent Adjustment) and any justifications p ursuant to 
O.M.C. 8.22.070C.2 (Rent Increases In Excess of CPI Rent Adjust ment) 
except for the following:  
a.  A series of rent increases composed solely of CPI Adjustmen ts may 
exceed the 30 percent limitation;  
b.  Exceeding the 30 percent limitation is required for the own er to obtain a 
fair return pursuant to O.M.C. 8.22.070C.1.d2.f.  
4.  If an owner is entitled to a rent increase or increases tha t cannot be taken 
because of the Rent increase limitations pursuant to Subsection s 2. or 3. 
above, the owner may defer the start date of the increase to a future period, 
provided that in the rent increase notice that limits the owner's ability to take 
the increases, the owner must identify the justification and th e amount or 
percentage of the deferred increase that may be applied in the future.  
B.  CPI and Banking Rent Adjustments.  
1.  Effective Date of this Section. An owner may first impose C PI Rent 
Adjustments pursuant to this section that take effect on or after July 1, 2002.  
2.  CPI and Banking Rent Adjustment Not Subject to Petition. A Tenant may not 
petition to contest a rent increase justified in an amount up t o and including 
the CPI Rent Adjustment and/or any Banking Rent increase unless the tenant 
alleges one or more of the following:  
a.  The owner failed to provide the notice required at the comm encement 
of tenancy and did not cure such failure (Section 8.22.060);  
b.  The owner failed to provide the notice required with a rent  increase 
(Section 8.22.070 H);  
c.  The owner decreased housing services;  
d.  The covered unit has uncured health, safety, fire, or build ing code 
violations pursuant to Section 8.22.070 D.7);  
e.  Any or all of a Banking Rent increase is not correctly calc ulated or the 
Owner is not eligible for a Banking Rent increase;  
f.  The Rent increase exceeds the limitations set out in Section 8.22.090A.3;  
g.  The Rent increase is inoperative pursuant to Section 8.22.0 90D.7;  
h.  The Owner has increased the rent once during the preceding twelve (12) 
month period without qualifying for an exception pursuant to Se ction 
8.22.070.A.1.  
3.  Calculation of the CPI Rent Adjustment. Beginning in 2002, the CPI Rent 
Adjustment is the average of the percentage increase in the CPI —All items 
and the CPI—Less shelter for the twelve (12) month period starting on March 
 
 
-24- 
2834132v16 
 
1 of each calendar year and ending on the last day of February of the 
following calendar year calculated to the nearest one tenth of one percent.  
4.  Effective Date of CPI Rent Adjustments. An owner may notice  a  r e n t  
increase for a CPI Rent Adjustment so that the rent increase is  effective 
during the period from July 1 following the Rent Adjustment Pro gram's 
announcement of the annual CPI Rent Adjustment through June 30 of the 
next year. The rent increase notice must comply with state law and take effect 
on or after the tenant's anniversary date.  
5.  Banking. In accordance with rules set out in the regulation s, an owner may 
bank CPI rent adjustments and annual permissible rent adjustmen ts 
previously authorized by this Chapter and notice a Banking Rent  increase 
concurrent with a CPI Rent Adjustment.  
6.  Schedule of Prior Annual Permissible Rent Adjustments. Form er annual 
permissible rent adjustments available under the prior versions  o f  t h i s  
Chapter:  
a.  May 6, 1980 through October 31, 1983, the annual rate was t en percent.  
b.  November 1, 1983 through September 30, 1986, the annual rat e was 
eight percent.  
c.  October 1, 1986 through February 28, 1995, the annual rate was six 
percent.  
d.  March 1, 1995 through June 30, 2002, the annual rate was th ree 
percent.  
C.  Rent Increases in Excess of the CPI Rent Adjustment or Bank ing.  
1.  For Rent increases based on grounds other than the CPI Rent  Adjustment 
or Banking, an Owner must first petition the Rent Program and r eceive 
approval for the Rent increase before the Rent increase can be imposed. A 
Rent increase in excess of the CPI Rent Adjustment or a Banking  increase 
must be justified on one or more of the following grounds:  
a.  Capital improvement costs, including financing of capital i mprovement 
costs;  
b.  Uninsured repair costs;  
c.  Increased housing service costs;  
d.  The rent increase is necessary to meet constitutional or fa ir return 
requirements.; 
e. The rent increase is imposed for an additional occupant, as defined by 
Section 8.22.020.  
2.  The amount of rent increase allowable for the grounds liste d in Section 
8.22.070 C.2 are subject to the limitations set forth in the regulations.  
D.  Rent Increase Notices and Operative Dates for Rent Increase s.  
 
 
-25- 
2834132v16 
 
1.  CPI and Banking Increases not subject to a Petition. Rent i ncrease notices 
for CPI and Banking Rent increases that are not the subject of a Petition shall 
be operative in accordance with this Chapter and State law.  
2.  Owner Petitions.  
a.  An Owner may notice a Rent increase based on a petition aft er the 
service date of the decision subject to the limitation of one Rent Increase 
each twelve (12) months (the effective date of the Rent increase).  
b.  Except for any portion of the petitioned-for Rent increase that is based 
on a CPI Rent or Banking Rent Increase, a Tenant is not required to pay 
the Rent increase until there is a final decision on the petiti on pursuant 
to Section 8.22.070 D.5 (the operative date of the Rent increas e). 
However if the Tenant chooses not to pay the Rent increase, the Tenant 
owes the increased Rent starting from the effective date of the  Rent 
increase if the final decision upholds the Hearing Officer's decision.  
c.  In a decision by the board or an appeals panel, the decisio n may (or may 
direct staff to) calculate the amount due and determine a repay ment 
schedule consistent with the rent board regulations for the Tenant to pay 
any back Rent due or for the Tenant to receive any rent credits  if the 
Tenant paid a Rent increase that is not upheld on appeal. Howev er, a 
Hearing Officer shall calculate the amount due if there is a factual dispute 
regarding such amount.  
d.  If a final decision permits a greater Rent increase than th e amount 
permitted in the Hearing Officer's decision, the Owner may issue another 
Rent increase notice up to the amount allowed in the final deci sion, and 
such additional notice is not subject to the limitation of no more than one 
Rent increase with in twelve (12) month period.  
e.  If the final decision permits a smaller Rent increase than the amount 
permitted in the Hearing Officer's decision, the Tenant need only pay the 
Rent increase based on the amount of the final decision.  
3.  Tenant Petitions.  
a.  While a tenant petition is pending, a tenant must pay when due, pursuant 
to the rent increase notice, the amount of the rent increase th at is equal 
to the CPI Rent Adjustment unless:  
i.  The tenant's petition claims decreased housing services; or   
ii.  The owner failed to separately state in the rent increase the amount 
that equals the CPI Rent Adjustment pursuant to Section 8.22.07 0 
H.  
b.  The amount of any noticed rent increase above the CPI Rent Adjustment 
and Banking that is the subject of a petition is not operative until the 
decision is final.  
 
 
-26- 
2834132v16 
 
4.  When a party appeals the decision of a hearing officer, the  t e n a n t  m u s t  
continue to pay the amount of the rent adjustment due during the period prior 
to the issuance of the decision and the remaining amount of the noticed rent 
increase is not operative until the board has issued its written decision.  
5.  Final decision. The decision on a petition is final when an y one of the 
following events have occurred:  
a.  A hearing officer decision has been issued and the time for  appeal has 
passed without an appeal being filed;  
b.  An appeal decision is issued and the time to file a writ of  administrative 
mandamus has passed without a writ being filed; or  
c.  When a court issues a final decision, including any further  court appeals, 
on any writ of administrative mandamus contesting a Rent Board appeal 
decision.  
6.  No part of any noticed rent increase is operative during th e period after the 
tenant has filed a petition and the applicable covered unit has  been cited in 
an inspection report by the approp riate governmental agency as containing 
serious health, safety, fire, or building code violations as de fined by Section 
17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code, excluding any , violation 
caused by a disaster or where the owner proves the violation wa s solely 
caused by the willful conduct of the tenant. In order for such rent increase to 
be operative the owner must provide proof that the cited violat ion has been 
abated. The owner must then issue a new rent increase notice pu rsuant to 
California Civil Code Section 827. The rent increase will be op erative in 
accordance with Section 827. However, if an Owner files a petition for a Rent 
increase, the Tenant must include the allegation of code violat ions in the 
response to the petition for this subsection to be considered.  
E.  An owner cannot increase the rent for a covered unit except  by following the 
procedures set out in this Chapter (including the Just Cause fo r Eviction 
Ordinance (O.M.C. Chapter 8.22, Article II) and the Ellis Act O rdinance (O.M.C. 
Chapter 8.22, Article III)) or where Costa-Hawkins allows an ow ner to set the 
initial rent for a new tenant without restriction.  
F.  Decreased housing services. A decrease in housing services is considered an 
increase in rent. A tenant may petition for an adjustment in re nt based on a 
decrease in housing services under standards in the regulations . The tenant's 
petition must specify the housing services decreased. Where a r ent or a rent 
increase has been reduced for decreased housing services, the r ent or rent 
increase may be restored in accordance with procedures set out in the 
regulations when the housing services are reinstated.  
G.  Pass-through of Fee. An owner may pass-through one half of the fee to a tenant 
in accordance with Section 8.22.500G. The allowed fee pass-thro ugh shall not 
be added to the rent to calculate the CPI Rent Adjustment or an y other rent 
adjustment and shall not be considered a rent increase.  
H.  Notice Required to Increase Rent or Change Other Terms of T enancy.  
 
 
-27- 
2834132v16 
 
1.  All Rent Increase Notices. As part of any notice to increas e rent or change 
any terms of tenancy, an owner must include:  
a.  Notice of the existence of this Chapter; and  
b.  The tenant's right to petition against any rent increase in  excess of the 
CPI Rent Adjustment unless such rent increase is pursuant to an  
approved Petition.  
2.  Notices for Rent Increases Based on the CPI Rent Adjustment  or Banking. 
As part of a notice to increase Rent based on the CPI Rent Adju stment or 
Banking, an Owner must include:  
a.  The amount of the CPI Rent Adjustment; and  
b.  The amount of any Banking increase.  
3.  Notices for Rent Increases Based on Owner Petition. As part  of a notice to 
increase rent based on an owner petition, an owner must include a summary 
of the decision in the form provided by the Rent Adjustment Pro gram 
pursuant to the following:  
a.  The Rent Adjustment Program will provide a summary of any d ecision, 
including an appeal decision or final decision with the decisio n or final 
decision, which the Owner shall include in a notice of rent increase.  
b.  The Rent Adjustment Program may provide optional, "safe har bor" forms 
for required notices, unless the ordinance or regulations require use of a 
specified form.  
4.  A notice to increase rent must include the information required by Subsection 
8.22.070H.1. using the language and in a form prescribed by the  Rent 
Adjustment Program.  
5.  A rent increase is not permitted unless the notice meets th e requirements of 
California Civil Code Section 827.  
6.  A rent increase is not permitted unless the notice required  by this section is 
provided to the tenant. An owner's failure to provide the notic e required by 
this section invalidates the rent increase or change of terms of tenancy. This 
remedy is not the exclusive remedy for a violation of this provision.  
I.  An owner may terminate the tenancy for nonpayment of rent ( California Code of 
Civil Procedure § 1161(2) (unlawful detainer)) of a tenant who fails to pay the 
portion of a rent increase that is equal to the CPI Rent Adjust ment when the 
tenant is required to do so by this subsection. In addition to any other defenses 
to the termination of tenancy the tenant may have, a tenant may  defend such 
termination of tenancy on the basis that:  
1.  The owner did not comply with the notice requirements for a  rent increase; 
or  
2.  The tenant's petition was based on decreased housing servic es.  
 
 
 
-28- 
2834132v16 
 
 
8.22.090 - Petition and response to filing procedures.  
 
A.  Tenant Petitions.  
1.  Tenant may file a petition regarding any of the following:  
a.  A rent increase was given that is not based on the CPI rent  adjustment, 
banking; and/or a final decision in an owner petition;  
b.  The owner set an initial rent in excess of the amount permi tted pursuant to 
Section 8.22.080 (Rent increases following vacancies);  
c.  A rent increase notice failed to comply with the requiremen ts of Subsection 
8.22.070H;  
d.  The owner failed to give the tenant a notice in compliance with Section 
8.22.060 and State law;  
e.  The owner decreased housing services to the tenant;  
f.  The tenant alleges the covered unit has been cited in an in spection report by 
the appropriate governmental agency as containing serious healt h, safety, 
fire, or building code violations pursuant to Subsection 8.22.070 D.6;  
g.  The owner fails to reduce rent on the month following the e xpiration of the 
amortization period for capital improvements, or to pay any int erest due on 
any rent overcharges from the failure to reduce rent for a capi tal 
improvement.  
h. The owner noticed a rent increase of more than the ten (10) percent that 
exceeds the annual limit as provided in Section 8.22.070A2 or t hat exceeds 
the rent increase limit of thirty (30) percent in five years.  
i.  The petition is permitted by the Just Cause for Eviction Or dinance (Measure 
EE) O.M.C. 8.22.300 or its regulations.  
j.  The petition is permitted by the Ellis Act Ordinance, O.M.C . 8.22.400, or its 
regulations.  
k.  The tenant contests an exemption from this O.M.C. 8.22, Art icle I or Article 
II.  
l.  The tenant claims the owner has received reimbursements for  any portion of 
cost or financing of capital improvements after a capital impro vement rent 
increase has been approved, and has not prorated and refunded s uch 
reimbursement.  
m.   After a rent increase imposed for an additional occupant as defined by 
Section 8.22.020, the owner fails to reduce the rent following a decrease in 
occupancy. 
 
2.  For a petition contesting a rent increase, the petition mus t be filed as follows:  
 
 
-29- 
2834132v16 
 
a.  If the owner provided written notice of the existence and s cope of this 
Chapter as required by Section 8.22.060 at the inception of tenancy:  
i.  The petition must be filed within ninety (90) days of the d ate the owner 
serves the rent increase notice if the owner provided the RAP notice with 
the rent increase; or  
ii.  The petition must be filed within one hundred twenty (120)  days of the 
date the owner serves the rent increase if the owner did not pr ovide the 
RAP notice with the rent increase.  
b.  If the owner did not provide written notice of the existenc e and scope of this 
Chapter as required by Section 8.22.060 at the inception of ten ancy, within 
ninety (90) days of the date the tenant first receives written notice of the 
existence and scope of this Chapter as required by Section 8.22.060.  
3.  For a petition claiming decreased housing services:  
a.  If the decreased housing is the result of a noticed or disc rete change in 
services provided to the tenant (e.g., removal of parking place , requirement 
that tenant pay utilities previously paid by owner) the petitio n must be filed 
within ninety (90) days of whichever of the following is later:  
i.  The date the tenant is noticed or first becomes aware of th e decreased 
housing service; or  
ii.  The date the tenant first receives written notice of the e xistence and 
scope of this Chapter as required by Section 8.22.060.  
b.  If the decreased housing is ongoing (e.g., a leaking roof),  the tenant may file 
a petition at any point but is limited in restitution for ninet y (90) days before 
the petition is filed and to the period of time when the owner knew or should 
have known about the decreased housing service.  
4.  In order to file a petition or respond to an owner petition , a tenant must provide 
the following at the time of filing the petition or response:  
a.  A completed tenant petition or response on a form prescribe d by the rent 
adjustment program;  
b.  Evidence that the tenant's rent is current or that the tena nt is lawfully 
withholding rent; and  
c.  A statement of the services that have been reduced or elimi nated, if the 
tenant claims a decrease in housing services;  
d.  A copy of the applicable citation, if the tenant claims the  rent increase need 
not be paid because the covered unit has been cited in an inspe ction report 
by the appropriate governmental agency as containing serious health, safety, 
fire, or building code violations pursuant to Section 8.22.070D.6.  
5.  A tenant must file a response to an owner's petition within  thirty (30) days of 
service of the notice by the rent adjustment program that an ow ner petition was 
filed.  
 
 
-30- 
2834132v16 
 
B.  Owner Petitions and Owner Responses to Tenant Petitions.  
1.  In order for an owner to file a response to a tenant petiti on or to file a petition 
seeking a rent increase, the owner must provide the following:  
a.  Evidence of possession of a current City business license;  
b.  Evidence of payment of the rent adjustment program service fee;  
c.  Evidence of service of written notice of the existence and scope of the rent 
adjustment program on the tenant in each affected covered unit in the 
building prior to the petition being filed;  
d.  A completed response or petition on a form prescribed by th e rent 
adjustment program; and  
e.  Documentation supporting the owner's claimed justification( s) for the rent 
increase or supporting any claim of exemption.  
2.  An owner must file a response to a tenant's petition within  thirty (30) days of 
service of the notice by the rent adjustment program that a ten ant petition was 
filed.  
 
8.22.110 - Hearing procedures.  
 
A.  Hearing Officer. A hearing shall be set before a Hearing Of ficer to decide the issues 
in the petition.  
B.  Hearings.  
1.  All hearings on petitions shall be open to the public and r ecorded;  
2.  Any party to a hearing may be assisted by a representative who may be an 
attorney or any other person. A party must designate his or her representative in 
writing.  
C.  Notification and Consolidation. Rent Adjustment Program sta ff shall notify the owner 
and tenant in writing of the time and place set for hearing. Representatives of parties 
shall also be notified of hearings, provided that the Rent Adju stment Program has 
been notified in writing of a party's designation of a represen tative at least ten days 
prior to the notice of the hearing being sent. Disputes involvi ng more than one 
covered unit in any single building may be consolidated for hearing.  
D.  Time of Hearing and Decision.  
1.  The Hearing Officer shall have the goal of hearing the matt er within sixty (60) 
days of the original petition's filing date.  
2.  The Hearing Officer shall have a goal of rendering a decisi on within sixty (60) 
days after the conclusion of the hearing or the close of the re cord, whichever is 
later. The decision shall be issued in writing.  
3.  The decision of the examiner shall be based entirely on evi dence placed into the 
record.  
 
 
-31- 
2834132v16 
 
E.  A Hearing Officer may order a rent adjustment as restitutio n for any overcharges or 
undercharges due, subject to guidelines set out in the regulations.  
F.  Administrative Decisions.  
1.  Notwithstanding the acceptance of a petition or response by the Rent Adjustment 
Program, if any of the following conditions exist, a hearing may not be scheduled 
and a Hearing Officer may issue a decision without a hearing:  
a.  The petition or response forms have not been properly compl eted or 
submitted;  
b.  The petition or response forms have not been filed in a tim ely manner;  
c.  The required prerequisites to filing a petition or response  have not been met; 
or  
d.  A certificate of exemption was previously issued and is not  challenged by 
the tenant.; or  
e.  The petition and response for ms raise no genuine dispute as to any material 
fact, and the petition may be decided as a matter of law. 
 
2.  A notice regarding the parties' appeal rights will accompan y any decision issued 
administratively. Appeals are governed by Section 8.22.120.  
G.  Should the petitioner fail to appear at the designated hear ing, the Hearing Officer 
may dismiss the petition.  
 
  
 
 
-32- 
2834132v16 
 
ATTACHMENT C 
(Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance) 
 
Section 6 [8.22.360] - Good Cause Required for Eviction. A.   No landlord shall 
endeavor to recover possession, issue a notice terminating tenancy, or recover 
possession of a rental unit in the city of Oakland unless the landlord is able to 
prove the existence of one of the following grounds:  
1.  The tenant has failed to pay rent to which the landlord is legally entitled pursuant 
to the lease or rental agreement and under provisions of state or local law, and 
said failure has continued after service on the tenant of a written notice correctly 
stating the amount of rent then due and requiring its payment within a period, 
stated in the notice, of not less than three days. However, this subsection shall 
not constitute grounds for eviction where tenant has withheld rent pursuant to 
applicable law.  
2.   The tenant has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially violate a 
material term of the tenancy other than the obligation to surrender possession on 
proper notice as required by law, provided further that.  
 
a. nNotwithstanding any lease provision to the contrary, a land lord shall not 
endeavor to recover possession of a rental unit as a result of subletting of the 
rental unit by the tenant if the landlord has unreasonably withheld the right to 
sublet following a written request by the tenant, so long as the tenant 
continues to reside in the rental unit and the sublet constitutes a one-for-one 
replacement of the departing tenant(s). If the landlord fails to respond to the 
tenant in writing within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the tenant's written 
request, the tenant's request shall be deemed approved by the landlord.  
b. Notwithstanding any lease pro vision to the contrary, a landl ord shall not 
endeavor to recover possession of a rental unit based on the ad dition of 
occupants to the rental unit if the landlord has unreasonably r efused a written 
request by the tenant to add such occupant(s) to the unit, so l ong as the 
maximum number of occupants does not exceed the lesser of the a mounts 
allowed by Subsection (i) or (ii)  of this Section 8.22.360A.2.b . If the landlord 
fails to respond in writing with a description of the reasons for the denial of the 
request within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the tenant's wr itten request, the 
tenant's request shall be deemed approved by the landlord. However, for units 
restricted as affordable housing as defined by O.M.C. Section 1 5.72.030, a 
written resident request to add an occupant shall be deemed inc omplete and 
inadequate until such resident has provided all documentation r equired for 
qualification of such additional occupant and the household aft er the addition 
of such occupant under the rules restricting the housing. A lan dlord's 
reasonable refusal of the tenant's written request may not be b ased on either 
of the following: (1) the proposed additional occupant's lack of creditworthiness, 
if that person will not be legally obligated to pay some or all  of the rent to the 
landlord, or (2) the number of occupants allowed by the rental agreement or 
 
 
-33- 
2834132v16 
 
lease. With the exception of the restrictions stated in the pre ceding sentence, 
a landlord's reasonable refusal of the tenant's written request  may be based 
on, but is not limited to, the ground that the landlord resides  in the same unit 
as the tenant or the ground that the total number of occupants in a unit exceeds 
(or with the proposed additional occupant(s) would exceed) the lesser of (i) or 
(ii): 
            (i)   Two persons in a studio unit, three persons i n a one-bedroom unit, 
four persons in a two-bedroom unit, six persons in a three-bedroom unit, or 
eight persons in a four-bedroom unit; or, 
            (ii)   The maximum number permitted in the unit und er state law and/or 
other local codes such as the Building, Fire, Housing and Planning Codes. 
This Subsection 8.22.360A.2.b is not intended by itself to esta blish a direct 
landlord-tenant relationship between the additional occupant an d the landlord 
or to limit a landlord's rights under the Costa-Hawkins Rental Housing Act, 
California Civil Code Section 1954.50 et seq. (as it may be amended from time 
to time). Nothing in this subsection authorizes an occupancy th at would result 
in either transient habitation commercial activity as defined by O.M.C. Section 
17.10.440 or semi-transient commercial activity as defined by O .M.C. Section 
17.10.120. 
c. Before endeavoring to recover possession based on the violat ion of a lawful 
obligation or covenant of tenancy regarding subletting or limit s on the number 
of occupants in the rental unit, the landlord shall serve the t enant a written 
notice of the violation that provides the tenant with a minimum of fourteen (14) 
days opportunity to cure the violation. The tenant may cure the  violation by 
making a written request to add occupants referenced in Subsect ion a or b of 
Section 8.22.360A.2 or by using other reasonable means to cure the violation, 
including, without limitation, the removal of any additional or  unapproved 
occupant. Nothing in this Section 8.22.360A.2.c is intended to limit any other 
rights or remedies that the law otherwise provides to landlords. 
 
3.  The tenant, who had an oral or written agreement with the landlord which has 
terminated, has refused after written request or demand by the landlord to 
execute a written extension or renewal thereof for a further term of like duration 
and under such terms which are materially the same as in the previous 
agreement; provided, that such terms do not conflict with any of the provisions of 
this chapter. [O.M.C. Chapter 8.22, Article II].  
4.   The tenant has willfully caused substantial damage to the premises beyond 
normal wear and tear and, after written notice, has refused to cease damaging 
the premises, or has refused to either make satisfactory correction or to pay the 
reasonable costs of repairing such damage over a reasonable period of time.  
5.  The tenant has continued, following written notice to cease, to be so disorderly as 
to destroy the peace and quiet of other tenants at the property.  
 
 
-34- 
2834132v16 
 
6.  The tenant has used the rental unit or the common areas of the premises for an 
illegal purpose including the manufacture, sale, or use of illegal drugs.  
7.  The tenant has, after written notice to cease, continued to deny landlord access to 
the unit as required by state law.  
8.  The owner of record seeks in good faith, without ulterior reasons and with honest 
intent, to recover possession of the rental unit for his or her occupancy as a 
principal residence where he or she has previously occupied the rental unit as his 
or her principal residence and has the right to recover possession for his or her 
occupancy as a principal residence under a written rental agreement with the 
current tenants.  
9.  The owner of record seeks in good faith, without ulterior reasons and with honest 
intent, to recover possession for his or her own use and occupancy as his or her 
principal residence, or for the use and occupancy as a principal residence by the 
owner of record's spouse, domestic partner, child, parent, or grandparent.  
a.    Here the owner of record recovers possession under this Subsection (9) 
[Paragraph 8.22.360 A.9], and where continuous occupancy for the purpose 
of recovery is less than thirty-six (36) months, such recovery of the 
residential unit shall be a presumed violation of this chapter.  
b.   The owner of record may not recover possession pursuant to this subsection 
more than once in any thirty-six (36) month period,  
c.   The owner must move in to unit within three (3) months of the tenant's   
vacation of the premises.  
d.   Reserved. 
e.    A landlord may not recover possession of a unit from a tenant under 
Subsection 6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9], if the landlord has or receives notice, any 
time before recovery of possession, that any tenant in the rental unit:  
i.  Has been residing in the unit for five (5) years or more; a nd  
(a)    Is sixty (60) years of age or older; or  
(b)    Is a disabled tenant as defined in the California Fair Employment  
               and Housing Act (California Government Code § 12926); or  
 
ii.    Has been residing in the unit for five (5) years or more, and is a 
catastrophically ill tenant, defined as a person who is disabled as 
defined by Subsection (e)(i)(b) [8.22.360 A.9.e.i.b]]and who suffers from 
a life threatening illness as certified by his or her primary care 
physician.  
f.  The provisions of Subsection (e) [8.22.360 A.9.e] above sha ll not apply 
where the landlord's qualified relative who will move into the unit is 60 years 
of age or older, disabled or catastrophically ill as defined by Subsection (e) 
[8.22.360 A.9.e], and where every rental unit owned by the landlord is 
 
 
-35- 
2834132v16 
 
occupied by a tenant otherwise protected from eviction by Subsection (e) 
[8.22.360 A.9.e].  
g.  A tenant who claims to be a member of one of the classes pr otected by 
Subsection 6(A)(9)(e) [8.22.360 A.9.e] must submit a statement, with 
supporting evidence, to the landlord. A landlord may challenge a tenant's 
claim of protected status by requesting a hearing with the Rent Board. In 
the Rent Board hearing, the tenant shall have the burden of proof to show 
protected status. No civil or criminal liability shall be imposed upon a 
landlord for challenging a tenant's claim of protected status. The Rent 
Board shall adopt rules and regulations to implement the hearing 
procedure.  
h.   Once a landlord has successfully recovered possession of a rental unit 
pursuant to Subsection 6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9], no other current landlords 
may recover possession of any other rental unit in the building under 
Subsection 6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9]. Only one specific unit per building may 
undergo a Subsection 6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9] eviction. Any future evictions 
taking place in the same building under Subsection 6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9] 
must be of that same unit, provided that a landlord may file a petition with 
the Rent Board or, at the landlord's option, commence eviction proceedings, 
claiming that disability or other similar hardship prevents him or her from 
occupying a unit which was previously the subject of a Subsection 6(A)(9) 
[8.22.360 A.9] eviction. The Rent Board shall adopt rules and regulations to 
implement the application procedure.  
i.  A notice terminating tenancy under this Subsection must contain, in addition 
to the provisions required under Subsection 6(B)(5) [8.22.360 B.5]:  
i. A listing of all property owned by the intended future occupant(s).  
 ii. The address of the real property, if any, on which the intended future 
occupant(s) claims a homeowner's property tax exemption.  
10. The owner of record, after having obtained all necessary permits from the City of 
Oakland on or before the date upon which notice to vacate is given, seeks in 
good faith to undertake substantial repairs that cannot be completed while the 
unit is occupied, and that are necessary either to bring the property into 
compliance with applicable codes and laws affecting health and safety of tenants 
of the building, or under an outstanding notice of code violations affecting the 
health and safety of tenants of the building.  
a.   Upon recovery of possession of the rental unit, owner of record shall 
proceed without unreasonable delay to effect the needed repairs. The 
tenant shall not be required to vacate pursuant to this section, for a period 
in excess of three months; provided, however, that such time period may be 
extended by the Rent Board upon application by the landlord. The Rent 
Board shall adopt rules and regulations to implement the application 
procedure.  
 
 
-36- 
2834132v16 
 
b. Upon completion of the needed repairs, owner of record shall  offer tenant 
the first right to return to the premises at the same rent and pursuant to a 
rental agreement of substantially the same terms, subject to the owner of 
record's right to obtain rent increase for capital improvements consistent 
with the terms of the Oakland Residential Rent Arbitration Ordinance or any 
successor ordinance.  
c.    A notice terminating tenancy under this Subsection 6(A)(10) [8.22.360   
A.10] must include the following information:  
i.  A statement informing tenants as to their right to payment under the 
Oakland Relocation Ordinance.  
ii.  A statement that "When the needed repairs are completed on  your unit, 
the landlord must offer you the opportunity to return to your unit with a 
rental agreement containing the same terms as your original one and 
with the same rent (although landlord may be able to obtain a rent 
increase under the Oakland Residential Rent Arbitration Ordinance 
[O.M.C. Chapter 8.22, Article I)."  
iii.   Reserved. 
iv.   An estimate of the time required to complete the repairs and the date 
upon which it is expected that the unit will be ready for habitation.  
11. The owner of record seeks remove the property from the rental market in 
accordance with the terms of the Ellis Act (California Government Code Section 
7060 et seq.).  
B.  The following additional provisions shall apply to a landlord who seeks to recover a 
rental unit pursuant to Subsection 6(A) [8.22.360 A]:  
1.   The burden of proof shall be on the landlord in any eviction action to which this 
order is applicable to prove compliance with Section 6 [8.22.360].  
2.    A landlord shall not endeavor to recover possession of a rental unit unless at 
least one of the grounds enumerated in Subsection 6(A) [8.22.360 A] above is 
stated in the notice and that ground is the landlord's dominant motive for 
recovering possession and the landlord acts in good faith in seeking to recover 
possession.  
3.   Where a landlord seeks to evict a tenant under a just cause ground specified in 
Subsections 6(A)(7, 8, 9, 10, 11) [8.22.360 A.7, 8, 9, 10, 11], she or he must do 
so according to the process established in CCC § 1946 (or successor 
provisions providing for 30 day notice period); where a landlord seeks to evict a 
tenant for the grounds specified in Subsections 6(A)(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) [8.22.360 
A.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], she or he must do so according to the process established in 
CCP § 1161 (or successor provisions providing for 3 day notice period).  
4.   Any written notice as described in Subsection 6(A)(2, 3, 4, 5, 7) [8.22.360 A.2, 
3, 4, 7] shall be served by the landlord prior to a notice to terminate tenancy and 
shall include a provision informing tenant that a failure to cure may result in the 
initiation of eviction proceedings.  
 
 
-37- 
2834132v16 
 
5.   Subsection 6(B)(3) [8.22.360 B.3] shall not be construed to obviate the need for 
a notice terminating tenancy to be stated in the alternative where so required 
under CCP § 1161.  
6.   A notice terminating tenancy must additionally include the following:  
a.   A statement setting forth the basis for eviction, as described in Subsections 
6(A)(1) [8.22.360 A.1] through 6(A)(11) [8.22.360 A.11];  
b.   A statement that advice regarding the notice terminating tenancy is 
available from the Rent Board.  
c.   Where an eviction is based on the ground specified in Subsection 6(A)(9) 
[8.22.360 A.9], the notice must additionally contain the provisions specified 
in Subsection 6(A)(9)(i) [8.22.360 A.9.i].  
d.   Where an eviction is based on the ground specified in Subsection 6(A)(10) 
[8.22.360 A.10], the notice must additionally contain the provisions specified 
in Subsection 6(A)(10)(c) [8.22.360 A.10].  
e.   Failure to include any of the required statements in the notice shall be a 
defense to any unlawful detainer action.  
7.   Within ten (10) days of service of a notice terminating tenancy upon a tenant, a 
copy of the same notice and any accompanying materials must be filed with the 
Rent Board. Each notice shall be indexed by property address and by the name 
of the landlord. Such notices shall constitute public records of the City of 
Oakland, and shall be maintained by the Rent Board and made available for 
inspection during normal business hours. Failure to file the notice within ten (10) 
days of service shall be a defense to any unlawful detainer action.  
C.   Reserved.  
D.   Substantive limitations on landlord's right to evict. This subsection (D) [8.22.360 D] 
is intended as both a substantive and procedural limitation on a landlord's right to 
evict.   
1.   In any action to recover possession of a rental unit pursuant to Section 6 
[8.22.360], a landlord must allege and prove the following:  
a.   the basis for eviction, as set forth in Subsection 6(A)(1) through 6(A)(11) 
[8.22.360 A.1 through 8.22.360 A.11] above, was set forth in the notice of 
termination of tenancy or notice to quit;  
b.    that the landlord seeks to recover possession of the unit with good faith,   
       honest intent and with no ulterior motive;  
 
2.   If landlord claims the unit is exempt from this ordinance, landlord must allege 
and prove that the unit is covered by one of the exceptions enumerated in 
Section 5 [8.22.350] of this chapter. Such allegations must appear both in the 
notice of termination of tenancy or notice to quit, and in the complaint to recover 
possession. Failure to make such allegations in the notice shall be a defense to 
any unlawful detainer action.  
 
 
-38- 
2834132v16 
 
3.   This subsection (D) [8.22.360 D] is intended as both a substantive and 
procedural limitation on a landlord's right to evict. A landlord's failure to comply 
with the obligations described in Subsections 7(D)(1) or (2) [ sic ] [8.22.360 D.1 
or 8.22.360 D.2] shall be a defense to any action for possession of a rental unit.  
4.  In any action to recover possession of a rental unit filed under 8.22.360A1, it 
shall be a defense if the landlord impeded the tenant’s effort to pay rent by 
refusing to accept rent paid on behalf of the tenant from a third party, or 
refusing to provide a W-9 form or other necessary documentation for the tenant 
to receive rental assistance from a government agency, non-profit organization, 
or other third party. Acceptance of rental payments made on behalf of the 
tenant by a third party shall not create a tenancy between the landlord and the 
third party as long as either the landlord or the tenant provide written notice that 
no new tenancy is intended. 
5.  A Landlord’s failure to fully comply with any applicable law requiring payment of 
relocation benefits to the tenant, such as those provided by Articles III, VII, and 
VIII of this Chapter and Chapter 15.60 of the Oakland Municipal Code, including 
but not limited to amount and timing, shall be a defense to any action for 
possession of a rental unit. 
6. Notwithstanding any change in the terms of a tenancy pursuan t to Civil Code 
Section 827, a tenant may not be evicted for a violation of a covenant or 
obligation that was not included in the tenant's written or oral rental agreement at 
the inception of the tenancy unless: (1) the change in the terms of the tenancy is 
authorized by the Rent Ordinance or California Civil Code Sections 1947.5 or 
1947.12, or required by federal, state, or local law, or regulatory agreement with 
a government agency; or (2) the change in the terms of the tenancy was 
accepted in writing by the tenant after receipt of written notice from the landlord 
that the tenant need not accept such new term as part of the rental agreement 
and in exchange for valid consideration.  
E.   In the event that new state or federal legislation confers a right upon landlords to 
evict tenants for a reason not stated herein, evictions proceeding under such 
legislation shall conform to the specifications set out in this chapter [O.M.C. Chapter 
8.22, Article II].  
F.    The City Council is authorized to modify the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance 
(Measure EE [O.M.C., Chapter 8, Article II (8.22.300, et seq.)]) for the purpose of 
adding limitations on a landlord’s right to evict, but the City Council may not modify 
any exemption from this Ordinance contained in Section 5 [O.M.C. Section 
8.22.350]. 
 
  
 
 
-39- 
2834132v16 
 
ATTACHMENT D 
(Terminating Tenancy to Withdraw Residential Rental Units from the Rental Market) 
 
8.22.410 - Definitions.  
 
"Disabled" means a person with a disability, as defined in Sect ion 12955.3 of the 
Government Code.  
"Elderly" means a person sixty-two (62) years old or older.  
"Lower-income tenant household" means tenant households whose i ncome is not more 
than that permitted for lower income households, as defined by California Health and 
Safety Code Section 50079.5.  
"Minor child(ren)" means a person(s) who is eighteen (18) years  or younger at the time 
the notice of withdrawal of accommodations is served on the program.  
"Owner" means an owner of record of the real property on which the rent units to be 
withdrawn are located.  
"Rent Adjustment Program" means the Rent Adjustment Program as that term is defined 
in O.M.C. 8.22.020.  
"Tenant" means a tenant as that term is defined in O.M.C. 8.22.340020 and also includes 
a lessee.  
"Unit or Rental Unit" means a Rental Unit as that term is defined in O.M.C. 8.22.340 with 
the exception of those units designated in Section 8.22.350 as exempt.  
"Withdrawal Notices" means those documents an owner is required  to be filed with the 
Rent Adjustment Program pursuant to Paragraph 8.22.430A.  
"Withdrawn Unit" means a rental unit that has been withdrawn fr om the rental market in 
accordance with this O.M.C. 8.22.400 et seq.  
 
8.22.450 - Relocation payments.  
 
A.  Tenant Households who are required to move as a result of t he Owner's withdrawal 
of the accommodation from rent or lease shall be entitled to a relocation payment 
from the Owner equal to Relocation Payment amounts set forth in  O.M.C. 8.22.820 
A. The payment shall be divided equally among all Tenants occupying the Rental Unit 
at the time of service on the Tenants of the notice of intent t o withdraw the unit from 
rent or lease. Once notice of withdrawal of the accommodation from rent or lease has 
been given to the Tenant, the Owner is obligated to make the relocation payments.  
B.  Tenant Households in Rental Units withdrawn from the reside ntial market that 
include lower income, elderly or  disabled Tenants, and/or minor  children shall be 
entitled to a single additional relocation payment equal to the  additional Relocation 
Payment amounts set forth in O.M.C. 8.22.820 B. If a household qualifies for this 
additional payment, the payment shall be divided equally among eligible (lower-
income, elderly, disabled, parents/guardians of minor children) Tenants.  
 
 
-40- 
2834132v16 
 
C.  A tenant whose household qualifies for the additional payme nt may request it from 
the owner, provided the tenant gives written notice of his or h er entitlement to such 
payments to the owner within sixty (60) days of the date of del ivery to the Rent 
Adjustment Program of the Withdrawal Documents.  
D.  An owner who, reasonably and in good faith, believes that a  tenant does not qualify 
for the additional payment may request documentation from the tenant demonstrating 
the tenant's income qualification. Such documentation may not include any document 
that is protected as private or confidential under any state, l ocal, or federal law. The 
owner's request must be made within fifteen (15) days after rec eipt of the tenant's 
notification of eligibility for the additional payment. The ten ant has thirty (30) days 
following receipt of the owner's request for documentation to s ubmit documentation. 
The owner must keep the documents submitted by the tenant confi dential unless 
there is litigation or administrative proceedings regarding the  tenant's eligibility for 
relocation payments or the documents must be produced in response to a subpoena 
or court order, in which case the tenant may seek an order from  the court or 
administrative body to keep the documents confidential. Example s of the types of 
evidence that may be used to present a claim that a household is entitled to an extra 
payment based on a tenant's disability status include evidence that a tenant has a 
qualifying disability may be in the form of a statement from a treating physician or 
other appropriate health care provider authorized to provide tr eatment, such as a 
psychologist. A tenant may also submit evidence of a medical de termination from 
another forum, such as Social Security or worker's compensation ,  s o  l o n g  a s  i t  
includes the fact that the tenant has a disability and its probable duration.  
E.  Time for payment.  
1.  The owner must pay the tenant half of the relocation paymen t provided for in 
Section 8.22.450(A) when the termination notice is given to the  household and 
the remaining half when the tenant vacates the unit provided th at the tenant 
agrees, in writing, not to contest an unlawful detainer based o n the notice to 
terminate tenancy for the withdrawal of the tenant's rental unit. If the tenant does 
not so agree, then the entirety of the relocation payment is no t due unless the 
owner prevails in the unlawful detainer. If the owner prevails in the unlawful 
detainer, the relocation payment must be paid to the tenant pri or to the owner 
seeking a writ of possession for the tenant to vacate the withdrawn unit.  
2.  The owner must pay the tenant the additional payment provid ed for in Section 
8.22.450(B) within fifteen (15) days of the tenant's notice of eligibility or the tenant 
supplying documentation of the tenant's eligibility.  
3.     An owner who pays relocation expenses in conjunction wit h a notice to quit as 
required by this section need not pay the same relocation expen ses with any 
further notices to quit based O.M.C. Section 8.22.360 A.11 for the same unit that 
are served within 180 days of the notice that included the requ ired relocation 
payment. Nothing in this paragraph relieves the owner from portions of relocation 
expenses not yet paid by the owner or received by the tenant, i ncluding the 
remaining half due when the tenant vacates the unit. 
 
 
-41- 
2834132v16 
 
F.  Failure to make the relocation payments in the manner and w ithin such times as 
prescribed in this Section 8.22.450 is not a defense to an unla wful detainer action. 
However, if If an owner fails to make the relocation payment as prescribed, the tenant 
may file an action against the owner and, if the tenant is foun d eligible for the 
relocation payments, the tenant will be entitled to recover the amount of the relocation 
payments plus an equal amount as damages and the tenant's attorney's fees. Should 
the owner's failure to make the payments as prescribed be found  to be in bad faith, 
the tenant shall be entitled to the relocation payments plus an  additional amount of 
three times the amount of the relocation payments and the tenant's attorney's fees.  
G.  A tenant who is eligible for relocation payments under stat e or federal law, is not 
also entitled to relocation under this section. A tenant who is also eligible for relocation 
under the City of Oakland's code enforcement relocation program  (O.M.C. Chapter 
15.60), must elect for either relocation payments under this section or O.M.C. Chapter 
15.60, and may not collect relocation payments under both.  
H.  The regulations may provide  procedures for escrowing disputed relocation funds.  
 
 
  
 
 
-42- 
2834132v16 
 
ATTACHMENT E 
(Uniform Residential Tenant Relocation Ordinance) 
 
8.22.810 - Definitions.  
 
"Disabled" means a person with a disability, as defined in Sect ion 12955.3 of the 
Government Code.  
"Elderly" means a person sixty-two (62) years old or older.  
"Lower-Income Tenant Household" means Tenant Households whose income is not more 
than that permitted for lower income households, as defined by California Health and 
Safety Code Section 50079.5.  
"Minor Child(ren)" means a person(s) who is eighteen (18) years  or younger at the time 
the notice is served.  
"Owner" or "Property Owner" means a person, persons, corporation, partnership, limited 
liability company, or any other entity holding fee title to the  subject real property. In the 
case of multiple ownership of the subject real property, "Owner " or "Property Owner" 
refers to each entity holding any portion of the fee interest in the property, and the property 
owner's obligations in this Chapter shall be joint and several as to each property owner.  
"Qualifying Relocation Event" means any event or vacancy that t riggers a Tenant's right 
to relocation payments under the Oakland Municipal Code.  
"Rental Unit" means a dwelling space in the City containing a separate bathroom, kitchen, 
and living area, including a single-family dwelling or unit in a multifamily or multipurpose 
dwelling, or a unit in a condominium or cooperative housing project, or a unit in a structure 
that is being used for residential uses whether or not the resi dential use is a conforming 
use permitted under the Oakland Municipal Code or Oakland Plann ing Code, which is 
hired, rented, or leased to a household within the meaning of California Civil Code Section 
1940. This definition applies to any dwelling space that is act ually used for residential 
purposes, including live-work spaces, whether or not the reside ntial use is legally 
permitted.  
"Room" means an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a residential building in the City 
which is used for the purpose of sleeping, and is occupied by a Tenant Household for at 
least thirty (30) consecutive days. This includes, but is not l imited to, a rooming unit or 
efficiency unit located in a residential hotel, as that term is  defined in accordance with 
California Health and Safety Code Section 50519. This definitio n applies to any space 
that is actually used for residential purposes whether or not t he residential use is legally 
permitted. For purposes of determining the amount of relocation payments, a room is the 
equivalent of a studio apartment.  
"Tenant" means a Tenant as that term is defined in O.M.C. 8.22.340020 and also includes 
a lessee.  
"Tenant Household" means one (1) or more individual Tenants who rent or lease a Rental 
Unit or Room as their primary res idence and who share living ac commodations. In the 
case where an individual Room is rented to multiple Tenants under separate agreements, 
 
 
-43- 
2834132v16 
 
each individual Tenant of such Room shall constitute a "Tenant Household" for purposes 
of this article.  
 
8.22.820 - Amount of relocation payments.  
A.  Unless otherwise specified in a Section of the Oakland Muni cipal Code requiring 
relocation payments, Tenant Households who are required to move  as a result of a 
Qualifying Relocation Event shall be entitled to a relocation payment from the Owner 
in the sum of six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500.00) per  unit for studios and 
one-bedroom apartments; eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per unit for two-
bedroom apartments; and nine thousand eight hundred seventy-fiv e dollars 
($9,875.00) per unit for units with three or more bedrooms. The  payment shall be 
divided equally among all Tenants occupying the Rental Unit at the time of service 
on the Tenants of the notice of termination of tenancy.  
B.  Unless otherwise specified in a Section of the Oakland Muni cipal Code requiring 
relocation payments, Tenant Households in Rental Units that inc lude lower income, 
elderly or disabled Tenants, and/or minor children shall be ent itled to a single 
additional relocation payment of two thousand five hundred doll ars ($2,500.00) per 
unit from the Owner. If a household qualifies for this additional payment, the payment 
shall be divided equally among eligible (lower-income, elderly,  disabled, 
parents/guardians of minor children) Tenants.  
C.  In the case of temporary relocations under O.M.C. 15.60.110  B., the amounts in 
paragraphs A-B shall be a cap on relocation payments.  
D.  The relocation payments specified in subsection 8.22.820 A.  shall increase annually 
on July 1 in accordance with the CPI Adjustment as calculated i n OMC subsection 
8.22.070 B.3, and the increase shall apply to all eviction noti ces served on or after 
July 1. The first increase shall take place on July 1, 2017.  
 
  
 
 
-44- 
2834132v16 
 
ATTACHMENT F 
 
8.22.850 - Relocation Payments for Owner or Relative Move-Ins.  
 
A.  Applicability. An owner who evicts a tenant pursuant to O.M .C. Section 8.22.360 A.9. 
or where a tenant vacates following a notice or other communica tion stating the 
owner's intent to seek recovery of possession of the unit under  this O.M.C. Section 
must provide relocation payment under this Section. Relocation payment procedures 
pursuant to code compliance or Ellis Act evictions will be gove rned by the Code 
Compliance Relocation Ordinance and the Ellis Act Ordinance.  
B.  The property owner shall be responsible for providing reloc ation payments, in the 
amounts specified in Section 8.22.820, to an eligible tenant ho usehold in the form 
and manner prescribed under this article and any rules and regulations adopted under 
this article.  
C.  Tenant Eligibility for Payment. Tenants will be eligible fo r relocation payments 
according to the following schedule based on the effective date  of ay notice to 
terminate:  
1.  Upon taking possession of the rental unit, the tenant will be eligible for one-third 
(⅓) of the total payment pursuant to subsection B., above.  
2.  After one (1) year of occupancy of the rental unit, the ten ant will be eligible for 
two-thirds (⅔) of the total payment pursuant to subsection B., above.  
3.  After two (2) years of occupancy of the rental unit, the te nant will be eligible for 
the full amount of the total payment pursuant to subsection B., above.  
D.  Time for Payment.  
1.  The owner must pay the tenant half of the relocation paymen t provided for in 
Subsection 8.22.820 A. when the termination notice is given to the household 
and the remaining half when the tenant vacates the unit provided that the tenant 
agrees, in writing, not to contest an unlawful detainer based o n the notice to 
terminate tenancy for the owner or relative moving in to the tenant's rental unit. If 
the tenant does not so agree, then the entirety of the relocati on payment is not 
due unless the owner prevails in the unlawful detainer. If the owner prevails in 
the unlawful detainer, the relocation payment must be paid to t he tenant prior to 
the owner seeking a writ of possession for the tenant to vacate the unit.  
2.  The owner must pay the tenant the additional payment provid ed for in Section 
8.22.820 B. within fifteen (15) days of the tenant's notice of eligibility or the tenant 
supplying documentation of the tenant's eligibility.  
3.     An owner who pays relocation expenses in conjunction wit h a notice to quit as 
required by this section need not pay the same relocation expen ses with any 
further notices to quit based O.M.C. Section 8.22.360 A.9 for t he same unit that 
are served within 180 days of the notice that included the requ ired relocation 
payment. Nothing in this paragraph relieves the owner from portions of relocation 
expenses not yet paid by the owner or received by the tenant, i ncluding the 
remaining half due when the tenant vacates the unit. 
 
 
-45- 
2834132v16 
 
 
E.  Failure to make the relocation payments in the manner and w ithin such times as 
prescribed in this Section is not a defense to an unlawful detainer action.  
However, if If an owner fails to make the relocation payment as prescribed, the tenant 
may file an action against the owner and, if the tenant is foun d eligible for the 
relocation payments, the tenant will be entitled to recover the amount of the relocation 
payments plus an equal amount as damages and the tenant's attorney's fees. Should 
the owner's failure to make the payments as prescribed be found  to be in bad faith, 
the tenant shall be entitled to the relocation payments plus an  additional amount of 
three (3) times the amount of the relocation payments and the t enant's attorney's 
fees.  
F.  Owners may apply for a zero-interest loan from the City of Oakland for the purpose 
of satisfying their relocation payment obligation under this O.M.C Section if they meet 
the eligibility criteria set forth below. An owner qualifies fo r a relocation payment 
assistance loan if they meet the following two (2) conditions:  
1.  Ownership of fewer than five (5) units in the City of Oakla nd. In the case of a 
relative move-in, the relative must also not own any other real  estate property 
and must be of low or moderate income as defined by California Health and 
Safety Code Section 50093.  
2.  The owner must be ineligible for a cash-out refinance loan based on the 
underwriting criteria for investment properties set forward by Fannie Mae 
regulations.  
The owner must also meet at least one (1) of the following two (2) conditions to 
qualify:  
1.  The owner must not have more than six (6) months of liquid financial reserves 
as defined by Fannie Mae regulations.  
2.  The owner must qualify as low or moderate income as defined  by California 
Health and Safety Code Section 50093.  
The City Administrator may issue additional regulations or guidance to implement this 
subsection.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
-46- 
2834132v16 
 
NOTICE AND DIGEST 
 
  
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 8.22 OF THE OAKLAND 
MUNICIPAL CODE (RESIDENTIAL RENT ADJUSTMENTS AND 
EVICTIONS) TO (1) LIMIT THE MAXIMUM RENT INCREASE IN ANY 
ONE YEAR TO CONFORM TO STATE LAW; (2) MAKE  FAILURE TO 
PAY REQUIRED RELOCATION BENEFITS AN AFFIRMATIVE 
DEFENSE TO EVICTION; (3) LIMIT LATE FEES; (4) PROHIBIT 
UNILATERALLY IMPOSED CHANGES TO TERMS OF TENANCY; (5) 
ADD ONE-FOR-ONE REPLACEMENT OF ROOMMATES TO THE 
DEFINITION OF HOUSING SERVICES; (6) PROHIBIT EVICTION BASED 
ON ADDITIONAL OCCUPANTS IF LANDLORD UNREASONABLY 
REFUSED TENANT’S WRI TTEN REQUEST TO ADD OCCUPANT(S); 
AND (7) STRENGTHEN TENANTS’ RIGHTS AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
TENANT’S RIGHTS UNDER THE TENANT PROTECTION ORDINANCE  
 
 
 This ordinance amends the Tenant Protection Ordinance to strengthen tenants’ 
rights and their enforcement. It amends the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance to prohibit 
landlords from evicting tenants based on additional occupants i f the landlord 
unreasonably refused the tenant’s written request to add additional occupant. It Iimits late 
fees and prohibits unilateral changes to the terms of tenancy.  It conforms local law to 
state law with regard to the maximum rent increase permissible in any one year and 
making failure to pay required relocation benefits an affirmati ve defense to an eviction 
action. Consistent with the latter change, the ordinance makes conforming amendments 
to the Terminating Tenancy to Withdraw Residential Rental Units from the Rental Market, 
Uniform Residential Tenant Relocation, and Relocation Payments for Owner or Relative 
Move-in Ordinances.  
 
 
 
 