SOURCE: https://oaklandca.prelive.opencities.com/files/assets/city/v/1/housing-comm-dev/documents/landlords/view-revised-supplemental-legislation-4242023.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03T19:35Z

  
 
1 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY 
 
 
INTRODUCED BY COUNCIL PRESIDENT NIKKI FORTUNATO BAS 
AND COUNCILMEMBER DAN KALB ___________________________ 
CITY ATTORNEY’S OFFICE 
 
As revised by the City Council at the April 18, 2023 City Council meeting 
 
OAKLAND CITY COUNCIL 
 
ORDINANCE NO. ________________C.M.S. 
 
 
ORDINANCE ESTABLISHI NG A TIMELINE FOR TE RMINATION OF 
THE MORATORIUM ON RE SIDENTIAL EVICTIONS,  RENT 
INCREASES, AND LATE FEES ENACTED IN RESP ONSE TO THE 
COVID-19 PANDEMIC (O RDINANCE NOS. 13589 C.M.S., 13594 C.M.S. , 
13606 C.M.S.); AND A MENDING THE JUST CAU SE FOR EVICTION 
ORDINANCE TO: (1) PE RMANENTLY CODIFY CER TAIN 
PROTECTIONS ESTABLIS HED BY THE MORATORIU M; (2) 
PROHIBIT EVICTIONS BASED ON NON-PAYMENT OF RENT WHERE 
THE AMOUNT DEMANDED IS LESS THAN ONE MON TH OF HUD 
FAIR MARKET RENT; (3CONFORM OCCUPANCY LI MITATIONS TO 
STATE LAW; AND (4)  MAKE OTHER NON -SUBSTANTIVE 
CLARIFYING AMENDMENTS 
 
 
WHEREAS, on March 27, 2020, the City Council approved Ordinance No. 13589 
C.M.S., which imposed a  moratorium on most residential evictions and on rent increases above 
CPI in response to the COVID-19 pandemic; and 
 
WHEREAS, on May 19, 2020, the City Council approved Ordinance No. 13594 C.M.S., 
which extended the residential eviction moratorium until August 31, 2020; and   
 
WHEREAS, on July 21, 2020, the Cit y Council approved Ordinance No. 13606 C.M.S., 
which extended the residential eviction moratorium until the end of the Local COVID-19 
Emergency declared by City Council on March 9, 2020; and 
 
WHEREAS, on February 21, 2023, the City Council approved Resolution No. 89600 
C.M.S., which renewed and continued the City Council’s Declaration of a Local Emergency due 
to COVID-19; and 
 
WHEREAS, on March 21, 2023, the City Council approved Ordinance No. 13729 
C.M.S., which amended Oakland Municipal Code Chapte r 8.50 (Emergency Services 
2 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
Organization and Disaster Council) to require Council to review the need for continuing a local 
emergency at least once every 60 days, in conformance with state law; and 
 
WHEREAS, the residential eviction  moratorium and rent incr ease moratorium were  
enacted in response to the COVID -19 pandemic to , among other things,  promote housing 
stability, encourage compliance with shelter-in-place orders, prevent transmission of COVID-19, 
account for significant financial losses incurred as a  result of closures and lost wages , avoid 
unnecessary displacement and increased homelessness, and otherwise promote public health and 
safety during a time of unprecedented economic hardship and uncertainty; and    
 
WHEREAS, although the COVID-19 pandemic is not over, significant progress has 
been made since the moratoriums were first enacted  to ameliorate negative impacts of the 
pandemic, such as through the development of vaccines, the lifting of shelter-in-place orders, and 
businesses and schools re-opening; and 
 
WHEREAS, the City seeks to establish a timeline for ending the moratoriums, rather 
than leaving their expiration dates tied to the end of the Local Emergency , the date for which 
remains uncertain; and  
 
WHEREAS, establishing a set timeline for the termination of the moratoriums will 
benefit both tenants and landlords by providing advanced notice and predictability as to the 
future of evictions and rent increases in Oakland; and 
 
WHEREAS, on November 5, 2002, Oak land voters passed the Just Cause for Eviction 
Ordinance (Measure EE), codified in Chapter 8.22, Article II of the Oakland Municipal Code, 
establishing various tenant protections and procedures pertaining to residential evictions in 
Oakland; and 
 
WHEREAS, the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance plays a crucial role in the City’s 
ongoing efforts to slow, reduce, and prevent displacement and homelessness within the City of 
Oakland; and 
 
WHEREAS, the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance applies to  most residential rental 
units in Oakland, with the main exceptions being units constructed within the past 10 years and 
owner-occupied properties where the owner shares use of kitchen or bath facilities with tenants; 
and 
 
WHEREAS, the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance authorizes City Council to modify 
the Ordinance for the purpose of adding limitations on a landlord's right to evict  (O.M.C. 
8.22.360F); and  
 
WHEREAS, since the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance was passed in 2002, voters  and 
City Council have on numerous occasions recognized the need to expand coverage of the 
Ordinance by adding additional protections and removing exemptions, and that doing so is in the 
best interest of the City; and 
 
3 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
WHEREAS, Oakland continues to experie nce a severe housing shortage and an 
unprecedented number of unhoused or marginally housed residents; and 
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that reasonable regulation of aspects of the landlord -
tenant relationship is necessary to foster constructive communi cation, maintain an adequate 
supply of a variety of rental housing options, and protect the health, safety, and general welfare 
of the public; and 
 
WHEREAS, forfeiture of a rental agreement is a drastic legal remedy that should be 
pursued only in drastic circumstances; and  
 
 WHEREAS, by limiting evictions for nonpayment of less than one month of rent, City 
Council seeks to deter actions seeking forfeiture based on a relatively small amount of money to 
allow tenants an opportunity to become current and maintain their housing; and  
 
 WHEREAS, the rental market in the Bay Area is one of the most expensive in the 
country, and lower income residents frequently need to live together with roommates or family 
members in order to stay housed and afford rent; to the extent that state law occupancy limits are 
not exceeded, tenants should be able to live together with others  without facing eviction for 
doing so; and 
 
 WHEREAS, a study by Princeton University’s Eviction Lab found that the two years 
after local, state and federal eviction moratoriums were enacted saw the largest drop, nationally, 
in eviction filings on record, and Oakland’s Rent Adjustment Program shows si milar data — 
6,714 eviction notices were received in FY 2018 -19, 4,696 in FY 2019 -20, 881 in FY 2020 -21, 
and 807 in FY 2021-22; and  
 
 WHEREAS, nearly $220 million in emergency rental assistance has been committed in 
Alameda County, including nearly $60 mi llion in Oakland (Alameda County Housing and 
Community Development, All City Call presentation, March 17, 2023); and 
 
 WHEREAS, the California Housing Finance Agency of the U.S. Department of the 
Treasury provides assistance for  homeowners facing COVID -19 related financial hardships 
including, mortgage relief up to $80,000 and property tax assistance up to $20,000 
(https://camortgagerelief.org/); and 
 
 WHEREAS, robust outreach, education, and support to tenants and property owners 
about the provisions of this legislation is necessary which requires that the Administration 
prioritize filling budgeted, vacant positions in the Housing and Community Development 
Department’s Rental Adjustment Program to provide services to promote housing stability; and 
 
 WHEREAS, continued advocacy of County, State, and Federal government partners is 
necessary to secure additional resources to address the economic and housing impacts of 
COVID-19 on tenants and property owners; and 
 
4 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
 WHEREAS, the City Council finds that the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance is 
consistent with Civil Code Section 1946.2 (as enacted by  the Tenant Protection Act of 2019), 
and, in comparison to Civil Code Section 1946.2, further limits the reasons for terminati on of 
residential tenancy, provides additional tenant protections, and, in conjunction with other City 
ordinances, provides for higher relocation assistance amounts; and 
 
 WHEREAS, the City Council finds that the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance as 
amended herein is more protective than the provisions of Civil Code Section 1946.2; and 
 
 WHEREAS, this action is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act 
(“CEQA”) pursuant to sections of the CEQA Guidelines, taken together and each as a separate 
and independent basis, including but not limited to: Section 15378 (regulatory actions), Section 
15060(c)(2) (no direct or reasonably foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment), 
Section 15061(b)(3) (no significant environmental impact), and Sect ion 15183 (consistent with 
the general plan or zoning); and 
 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OAKLAND DOES 
ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS: 
 
SECTION 1 .  Recitals.  The City Council finds the foregoing recitals to be true and 
correct and hereby incorporates such findings into this ordinance.  
 
SECTION 2.  Purpose and Intent.   The purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to 
establish a phasing out of the moratorium on residential evictions, rent increases, and late fees  
that was enacted in March of 2020 in response to the COVID -19 pandemic. By setting forth a 
timeline and incremental revocation of the moratorium, the City seeks to provide adequate notice 
to residential t enants and landlords of the impending termination of the moratorium and to 
revoke the moratorium in phases to avoid a surge of evictions. The Ordinance also permanently 
codifies certain protections from the moratorium within the Just Cause For Eviction Ord inance, 
along with other eviction protections.   
 
SECTION 3.  Residential Eviction  Moratorium.  Section 3 of Ordinance No. 13589 
C.M.S., as amended by Ordinance Nos. 13594 C.M.S. and 13606 C.M.S., is hereby repealed and 
reenacted with amendments, as set forth below (additions are shown as double underline  and 
deletions are shown as strikethrough). 
 
Residential Eviction Moratorium. Except when the tenant poses an imminent threat to 
the health or safety of other occupants of the property, and such threat is stated in the 
notice as the grounds for the eviction, it shall be an absolute defense to any unlawful 
detainer action filed under Oakland Municipal Code 8.22.360A subsections (1) - (10) that 
the notice was served or expired, or that the complaint was filed or served,  between 
March 9 , 2020, and  July 14 , 2023. during the Local Emergency. Any notice served 
pursuant to Oakland Municipal Code 8 .22.360A (1) - (10) on a tenant during the Local 
Emergency shall include the following statement in bold underlined 12 -point font: 
“Except to protect the health and safety of other occupants of the property, you may 
5 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
not be evicted during the Local Emergency declared bv the City of Oakland in 
response to the COVID -19 pandemic. This  does not relieve you of the obligation to 
pay back rent in the future. You may contact the Rent Adjustment Program at (510) 
238-3721 for additional information and referrals. ” This section shall remain in effect 
until the Local Emergency declared on March 9, 2020, has been terminated by the City 
Council.   
 
SECTION 4.  Rent Increase Moratorium.  Section 4 of Ordinance No. 13589 C.M.S., 
as amended by Ordinance Nos. 13594 C.M.S. and 13606 C.M.S., is hereby repealed and 
reenacted with amendments, as set forth below (additions are shown as double underline  and 
deletions are shown as strikethrough). 
 
Rent Increase Moratorium.   For rental units regulated by Oakland Municipal Code 
8.22.010 et seq, any notice of rent increase in excess of the CPI Rent Adjustment, as 
defined in Oakland Municipal Code Section 8.22.020, shall be void and unenforceable if 
the notice is served or has an effective date between March 9, 2020, and June 30, 2024  
during the Local Emergency , unless required to provide a fair return.  Any notice of rent 
increase served during the Local Emergency  include the following statement in bold 
underlined 12 -point font: “During the Local Emergency declared by the City of 
Oakland in response to the COVID -19 pandemic, your rent may not be increased in 
excess of the CPI Rent Adjustment (3.5% until June 30, 2020), unless required for 
the landlord to obtain a fair return. You may contact the Rent Adjustment Program 
at (510) 238-3721 for additional information and referrals.”  
 
SECTION 5.  Late Fee Moratorium. Section 5 of Ordinance No. 13589 C.M.S., as 
amended by Ordinance Nos. 13594 C.M.S. and 13606 C.M.S., is hereby repealed and reenacted 
with amendments, as set forth below (additions are shown as double underline and deletions are 
shown as strikethrough). 
 
Late Fee Moratorium.   Notwithstanding any lease provision to the  contrary, for 
residential tenancies, no late fees may be imposed for rent that became due between 
March 9, 2020, and July 14, 2023 during the Local Emergency  if the rent was late for 
reasons resulting from the COVID -19 pandemic. This includes, but is not limited to (1) 
the tenant was sick or incapacitated due to COVID -19, or was complying with a 
recommendation from a governmental agency to self-quarantine, (2) the tenant suffered a 
substantial reduction in household income because of a loss of employment or a  
reduction in hours, or because they were unable to work because they were caring for 
their child(ren) who were out of school or a household or family member who was sick 
with COVID -19, or b ecause they were complying with a recommendation from a 
government agency to self -quarantine, and (3) the tenant incurred substantial out -of-
pocket medical expenses caused by COVID -19. Any notice demanding late fees for rent 
that became due during the Loca l Emergency shall include the following statement in 
bold underlined 12 -point font: “You are not required to pay  late fees for rent that 
became due during the Local Emergency declared by the City  of Oakland in 
response to the COVID -19 pandemic if the rent was late for reasons related to the 
6 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
pandemic. You may contact the Rent Adjustment Program at (510) 238 -3721 for 
additional information and referrals.” 
 
SECTION 6.  Evictions for N onpayment of Rent . Section 7 of Ordinance No. 13589 
C.M.S., as amended by Ordinance Nos. 13594 C.M.S. and 13606 C.M.S., is hereby repealed  and 
reenacted with amendments, as set forth below (additions are shown as double underline  and 
deletions are shown as strikethrough).  
 
No Residential Eviction for Nonpayment of Rent that Became Due During the Local 
Emergency. In any action for unlawful detainer filed under Oakland Municipal Code 
8.22.360.A.1, it shall be a defense that the unpaid rent became due between March 9, 
2020, and  July 14 , 2023 during t he Local Emergency  and was unpaid because of a 
substantial reduction in household income or substantial increase in expenses resulting 
from the Coronavirus pandemic. This includes, but is not limited to, where, as a result of 
the Coronavirus pandemic, the tenant suffered a loss of employment or a reduction in 
hours, or was unable to work because their children were out of school, or was unable to 
work because they were sick with COVID -19 or caring for a household or family 
member who was sick with COVID -19, or they were comp lying with a recommendation 
from a government agency to self -quarantine, or they incurred substantial out of pocket 
medical expenses due to COVID -19. Any notice served on a residential tenant 
demanding rent that became due during the Local Emergency shall include the following 
statement in bold underlined 12 -point type: “You may not be evicted for rent that 
became due during the Local Emergency if the rent was unpaid because of a 
substantial reduction in household income or a substantial increase in expense s 
related to the Coronavirus pandemic. This does not relieve you of the obligation to 
pay back rent in the future. You may contact the Rent Adjustment Program at (510) 
238-3721 for additional information and referrals.” Nothing in this subsection shall 
relieve the tenant of liability for the unpaid rent. 
 
SECTION 7. Amendments to Section 6 of the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance 
(Measure EE) (O.M.C. Section 8.22.360). Added text is shown as double underlined  type; 
deleted text is shown as strikethrough type. 
 
8.22.360- Good cause required for eviction. 
 
A. No landlord shall endeavor to recover possession, issue a notice terminating tenancy, or 
recover possession of a rental unit in the city of Oakland unless the landlord is able to prove 
the existence of one of the following grounds:  
1. The tenant has failed to pay rent to which the landlord is legally entitled pursuant to the 
lease or rental agreement and under provisions of state or local law, and said failure 
has continued after service on the tenant of a written notice correctly stating the 
amount of rent then due and requiring its payment within a period, stated in the notice, 
of not less than three days. However, this subsection shall not constitute grounds for 
eviction where tenant has withheld rent pursuant to applicable law or where the amount 
of rent demanded is less than one month of fair market rent for a unit of equivalent size 
7 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
in the Oakland metro area as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development. 
2. The tenant has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially violate a 
material term of the tenancy other than the obligation to surrender possession on proper 
notice as required by law. To establish a substantial violation of a material term of the 
tenancy, the landlord must demonstrate that the term of tenancy is reasonable, legal, 
and was accepted in writing by the tenant. 
a. Notwithstanding any lease provision to the contrary, a landlord shall not endeavor 
to recover possession of a rental unit as a result of subletting of the rental unit by 
the tenant if the landlord has unreasonably withheld the right to sublet following a 
written request by the tenant, so long as the tenant continues to reside in the rental 
unit and the sublet constitutes a one-for-one replacement of the departing 
tenant(s). If the landlord fails to respond to the tenant in writing within fourteen 
(14) days of receipt of the tenant's written request, the tenant's request shall be 
deemed approved by the landlord.  
b. Notwithstanding any lease provision to the contrary, a landlord shall not endeavor 
to recover possession of a rental unit based on the addition of occupants to the 
rental unit if the landlord has unreasonably refused a written request by the tenant 
to add such occupant(s) to the unit, so long as the maximum number of occupants 
does not exceed the lesser of the amounts allowed by Subsection (i) or (ii) of this 
Section 8.22.360A.2.b. If the landlord fails to respond in writing with a 
description of the reasons for the denial of the request within fourteen (14) days of 
receipt of the tenant's written request, the tenant's request shall be deemed 
approved by the landlord. However, for units restricted as affordable housing as 
defined by O.M.C. Section 15.72.030, a written resident request to add an 
occupant shall be deemed incomplete and inadequate until such resident has 
provided all documentation required for qualification of such additional occupant 
and the household after the addition of such occupant under the rules restricting 
the housing. A landlord's reasonable refusal of the tenant's written request may not 
be based on either of the following: (1) the proposed additional occupant's lack of 
creditworthiness, if that person will not be legally obligated to pay some or all of 
the rent to the landlord, or (2) the number of occupants allowed by the rental 
agreement or lease. With the exception of the restrictions stated in the preceding 
sentence, a landlord's reasonable refusal of the tenant's written request may be 
based on, but is not limited to, the ground that the landlord resides in the same 
unit as the tenant or the ground that the total number of occupants in a unit 
exceeds (or with the proposed additional occupant(s) would exceed) the lesser of 
(i) or (ii):  
(i) Two persons in a studio unit, three persons in a one-bedroom unit, four 
persons in a two-bedroom unit, six persons in a three-bedroom unit, or eight 
persons in a four-bedroom unit;  
(ii) The the maximum number permitted in the unit under state law and/or other 
local codes such as the Building, Fire, Housing and Planning Codes.  
8 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
This Subsection 8.22.360 A.2.b. is not intended by itself to establish a direct 
landlord-tenant relationship between the additional occupant and the landlord 
or to limit a landlord's rights under the Costa-Hawkins Rental Housing Act, 
California Civil Code Section 1954.50 et seq. (as it may be amended from 
time to time). Nothing in this subsection authorizes an occupancy that would 
result in either transient habitation commercial activity as defined by O.M.C. 
Section 17.10.440 or semi-transient commercial activity as defined by 
O.M.C. Section 17.10.120.  
c. Before endeavoring to recover possession based on the violation of a lawful 
obligation or covenant of tenancy regarding subletting or limits on the number of 
occupants in the rental unit, the landlord shall serve the tenant a written notice of 
the violation that provides the tenant with a minimum of fourteen (14) days 
opportunity to cure the violation. The tenant may cure the violation by making a 
written request to add occupants referenced in Subsection a or b of Section 
8.22.360 A.2. or by using other reasonable means to cure the violation, including, 
without limitation, the removal of any additional or unapproved occupant. 
Nothing in this Section 8.22.360 A.2.c. is intended to limit any other rights or 
remedies that the law otherwise provides to landlords or tenants.  
3. Reserved.  
4. The tenant has willfully caused substantial damage to the premises beyond normal 
wear and tear and, after written notice, has refused to cease damaging the premises, or 
has refused to either make satisfactory correction or to pay the reasonable costs of 
repairing such damage over a reasonable period of time.  
5. The tenant has continued, following written notice to cease, to be so disorderly as to 
destroy the peace and quiet of other tenants at the property.  
6. The tenant has used the rental unit or the common areas of the premises for an illegal 
purpose including the manufacture, sale, or use of illegal drugs. Residing in a rental 
unit that lacks a certificate of occupancy, has not been approved by the city for 
residential use, or that has been cited for housing, building, or planning code violations 
does not constitute use of the premises for an illegal purpose. 
7. The tenant has, after written notice to cease, continued to deny landlord access to the 
unit as required by state law.  
8. The owner of record seeks in good faith, without ulterior reasons and with honest 
intent, to recover possession of the rental unit for their own occupancy as a principal 
residence where the owner has previously occupied the rental unit as their principal 
residence and has the right to recover possession for their occupancy as a principal 
residence under a written rental agreement with the current tenants.  
9. The owner of record seeks in good faith, without ulterior reasons and with honest 
intent, to recover possession for their own use and occupancy as their principal 
residence, or for the use and occupancy as a principal residence by the owner of 
record's spouse, domestic partner, child, parent, or grandparent.  
9 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
a. Where the owner of record recovers possession under this Subsection (9) 
[Paragraph 8.22.360 A.9], and where continuous occupancy for the purpose of 
recovery is less than thirty-six (36) months, such recovery of the residential unit 
shall be a presumed violation of this Chapter.  
b. The owner of record may not recover possession pursuant to this subsection more 
than once in any thirty-six (36) month period,  
c. The owner must move in to unit within three (3) months of the tenant's vacation of 
the premises. Such time period may be extended for good cause upon application 
to, and approval by, the Rent Adjustment Program. 
d. Reserved.  
e. A landlord may not recover possession of a unit from a tenant under Subsection 
6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9], if the landlord has or receives notice, any time before 
recovery of possession, that any tenant in the rental unit:  
i. Has been residing in the unit for five (5) years or more; and  
(a) Is sixty (60) years of age or older; or  
(b) Is a disabled tenant as defined in the California Fair Employment 
and Housing Act (California Government Code § 12926); or  
ii. Has been residing in the unit for five (5) years or more, and is a 
catastrophically ill tenant, defined as a person who is disabled as defined by 
Subsection (e)(i)(b) [8.22.360 A.9.e.i.b]] and who suffers from a life 
threatening illness as certified by their primary care physician.  
f. The provisions of Subsection (e) [8.22.360 A.9.e] above shall not apply where the 
landlord's qualified relative who will move into the unit is 60 years of age or 
older, disabled or catastrophically ill as defined by Subsection (e) [8.22.360 
A.9.e], and where every rental unit owned by the landlord is occupied by a tenant 
otherwise protected from eviction by Subsection (e) [8.22.360 A.9.e].  
g. A tenant who claims to be a member of one of the classes protected by Subsection 
6(A)(9)(e) [8.22.360 A.9.e] must submit a statement, with supporting evidence, to 
the landlord. A landlord may challenge a tenant's claim of protected status by 
requesting a hearing with the Rent Board. In the Rent Board hearing, the tenant 
shall have the burden of proof to show protected status. No civil or criminal 
liability shall be imposed upon a landlord for challenging a tenant's claim of 
protected status. The Rent Board shall adopt rules and regulations to implement 
the hearing procedure.  
h. Once a landlord has successfully recovered possession of a rental unit pursuant to 
Subsection 6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9], no other current landlords may recover 
possession of any other rental unit in the building under Subsection 6(A)(9) 
[8.22.360 A.9]. Only one specific unit per building may undergo a Subsection 
6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9] eviction. Any future evictions taking place in the same 
building under Subsection 6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9] must be of that same unit, 
provided that a landlord may file a petition with the Rent Board or, at the 
10 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
landlord's option, commence eviction proceedings, claiming that disability or 
other similar hardship prevents the landlord from occupying a unit which was 
previously the subject of a Subsection 6(A)(9) [8.22.360 A.9] eviction. The Rent 
Board shall adopt rules and regulations to implement the application procedure.  
i. A notice terminating tenancy under this Subsection must contain, in addition to 
the provisions required under Subsection 6(B)(6) [8.22.360B.6] 6(B)(5) [8.22.360 
B.5]:  
i. A listing of all property owned by the intended future occupant(s).  
ii. The address of the real property, if any, on which the intended future 
occupant(s) claims a homeowner's property tax exemption.  
j.    If the owner or relative specified on the notice terminating tenancy fails to 
occupy the rental unit for at least a consecutive thirty-six month period, or fails to 
occupy the rental unit within ninety days after the tenant vacates, absent 
Subsection (c), the owner shall do the following: 
 
i. Offer the unit to the tenant who v acated it at the same rent in effect at the 
time the tenant vacated; and 
 
ii. Pay to said tenant all reasonable expenses incurred in returning to the 
unit, including lease termination fees, if any. This subsection does not limit 
any other remedies a tenant may have under this Chapter or other applicable 
law. 
10. The owner of record, after having obtained all necessary permits from the City of 
Oakland on or before the date upon which notice to vacate is given, seeks in good faith 
to undertake substantial repairs that cannot safely be completed while the unit is 
occupied, and that are necessary either to bring the property into compliance with 
applicable codes and laws affecting health and safety of tenants of the building, or 
under an outstanding notice of code violations affecting the health and safety of tenants 
of the building.  
a. As soon as the tenant vacates the rental unit, the owner of record shall proceed 
without unreasonable delay to complete the needed repairs. The tenant shall not 
be required to vacate pursuant to this section, for a period in excess of three 
months; provided, however, that such time period may be extended by the Rent 
Board upon application by the landlord for good cause upon application to, and 
approval by, the Rent Adjustment Program. The Rent Board shall adopt rules and 
regulations to implement the application procedure.  
b. Upon completion of the needed repairs, the owner of record shall offer the tenant 
the first right to return to the premises at the same rent and pursuant to the same 
terms of the rental agreement in effect as of the date of the notice to vacate, 
subject to the owner of record's right to petition the Rent Adjustment Program 
for a rent increase as provided by the Residential Rent Adjustment Ordinance. 
c. A notice to vacate under this Subsection 6(A)(10) [8.22.360 A.10] must include 
the following information:  
11 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
i. A statement informing tenants as to their right to payment under the Oakland 
Relocation Ordinance.  
ii. A statement that "When the needed repairs are completed on your unit, the 
landlord must offer you the opportunity to return to your unit with a rental 
agreement containing the same terms as your original one and with the same 
rent (although landlord may be able to obtain a rent increase under the 
Oakland Residential Rent Arbitration Ordinance [O.M.C. Chapter 8.22, 
Article I)."  
iii. A list of the code violations necessitating substantial repairs, a detailed 
description of the work to be performed, the permit numbers of any and all 
permits obtained to affect the required repairs, and a copy of the City-issued 
notice of code violations, if any. 
iv. A good faith estimate of the time required to complete the repairs and the 
date upon which it is expected that the unit will be ready for habitation.  
11. The owner of record seeks to remove the property from the rental market in accordance 
with the terms of the Ellis Act (California Government Code Section 7060 et seq.).  
B. The following additional provisions shall apply to a landlord who seeks to recover a rental 
unit pursuant to Subsection 6(A) [8.22.360 A]:  
1. The burden of proof shall be on the landlord in any eviction action to which this order 
is applicable to prove compliance with Section 6 [8.22.360].  
2. A landlord shall not endeavor to recover possession of a rental unit unless at least one 
of the grounds enumerated in Subsection 6(A) [8.22.360 A] above is stated in the 
notice and that ground is the landlord's dominant motive for recovering possession and 
the landlord acts in good faith in seeking to recover possession.  
3. Where a landlord seeks to evict a tenant under a just cause ground specified in 
Subsections 6(A)(7, 8, 9, 10, 11) [8.22.360 A.7, 8, 9, 10, 11], the landlord must do so 
according to the process established in CCC § 1946 (or successor provisions providing 
for a 30 or 60 day notice period); where a landlord seeks to evict a tenant for the 
grounds specified in Subsections 6(A)(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) [8.22.360 A.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], the 
landlord must do so according to the process established in CCP § 1161 (or successor 
provisions providing for 3 day notice period).  
4. Any written notice as described in Subsection 6(A)(2, 3, 4, 5, 7) [8.22.360 A.2, 3, 4, 7] 
shall be served by the landlord prior to a notice to terminate tenancy and shall include a 
provision informing tenant that a failure to cure may result in the initiation of eviction 
proceedings.  
5. Subsection 6(B)(3) [8.22.360 B.3] shall not be construed to obviate the need for a 
notice terminating tenancy to be stated in the alternative where so required under CCP 
§ 1161.  
6. A notice terminating tenancy must additionally include the following:  
a. A statement setting forth the basis for eviction, as described in Subsections 
6(A)(1) [8.22.360 A.1] through 6(A)(11) [8.22.360 A.11];  
12 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
b. A statement that advice regarding the notice terminating tenancy is available from 
the Rent Board Rent Adjustment Program (RAP), along with information about 
how the tenant may seek assistance, including the RAP phone number and email 
address. 
c. Where an eviction is based on the ground specified in Subsection 6(A)(9) 
[8.22.360 A.9], the notice must additionally contain the provisions specified in 
Subsection 6(A)(9)(i) [8.22.360 A.9.i] and a statement informing tenants of the 
limitations on evictions as set forth in Subsection 6(D)(8) [8.22.360D.8]. 
d. Where an eviction is based on the ground specified in Subsection 6(A)(10) 
[8.22.360 A.10], the notice must additionally contain the provisions specified in 
Subsection 6(A)(10)(c) [8.22.360 A.10] and a statement informing tenants of the 
limitations on evictions as set forth in Subsection 6(D)(8) [8.22.360D.8]. 
e. Failure to include any of the required statements in the notice shall be a defense to 
any unlawful detainer action.  
7. Within ten (10) days of service of a notice terminating tenancy upon a tenant, a copy of 
the same notice and any accompanying materials must be filed with the Rent Board. 
Each notice shall be indexed by property address and by the name of the landlord. 
Such notices shall constitute public records of the City of Oakland, and shall be 
maintained by the Rent Board and made available for inspection during normal 
business hours. Failure to file the notice within ten (10) days of service shall be a 
defense to any unlawful detainer action.  
C. Reserved.  
D. Substantive limitations on landlord's right to evict. This Subsection 8.22.360 D. is intended 
as both a substantive and procedural limitation on a landlord's right to evict.  
1. In any action to recover possession of a rental unit pursuant to Section 6 [8.22.360], a 
landlord must allege and prove the following:  
a. the basis for eviction, as set forth in Subsection 6(A)(1) through 6(A)(11) 
[8.22.360 A.1 though through 8.22.360 A.11] above, was set forth in the notice of 
termination of tenancy or notice to quit; and 
b. that the landlord seeks to recover possession of the unit with good faith, honest 
intent and with no ulterior motive;  
2. If landlord claims the unit is exempt from this ordinance, landlord must allege and 
prove that the unit is covered by one of the exceptions enumerated in Section 5 
[8.22.350] of this Chapter. Such allegations must appear both in the notice of 
termination of tenancy or notice to quit, and in the complaint to recover possession, 
and must specify on what grounds exemption is claimed. Failure to make such 
allegations in the notice shall be a defense to any unlawful detainer action.  
3. A landlord's failure to comply with the obligations described in Subsections (D)(1) or 
(2) [sic] [8.22.360 D.1. or 8.22.360 D.2.] shall be a defense to any action for 
possession of a rental unit.  
13 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
4. In any action to recover possession of a rental unit filed under subsection 8.22.360 A.1, 
it shall be a defense if the landlord impeded the tenant's effort to pay rent by refusing to 
accept rent paid on behalf of the tenant from a third party, or refusing to provide a W-9 
form or other necessary documentation for the tenant to receive rental assistance from 
a government agency, non-profit organization, or other third party. Acceptance of 
rental payments made on behalf of the tenant by a third party shall not create a tenancy 
between the landlord and the third party as long as either the landlord or the tenant 
provide written notice that no new tenancy is intended.  
5. A landlord's failure to fully comply with any applicable law requiring payment of 
relocation benefits to the tenant, such as those provided by Articles III, VII, and VIII of 
this Chapter and Chapter 15.60 of the Oakland Municipal Code, including but not 
limited to required notice, amount, timing, and any other requirement necessary to 
withdraw or repair a unit shall be a defense to any action for possession of a rental unit.  
6. Notwithstanding any change in the terms of a tenancy pursuant to Civil Code Section 
827, a tenant may not be evicted for a violation of a covenant or obligation that was not 
included in the tenant's written or oral rental agreement at the inception of the tenancy 
unless: (1) the change in the terms of the tenancy is authorized by the Rent Ordinance 
or California Civil Code Sections 1947.5 or 1947.12, or required by federal, state, or 
local law, or regulatory agreement with a government agency; or (2) the change in the 
terms of the tenancy was accepted in writing by the tenant after receipt of written 
notice from the landlord that the tenant need not accept such new term as part of the 
rental agreement and in exchange for valid consideration.  
7. In any action to recover possession of a rental unit filed under Subsections 8.22.360 
A.1.—10., it shall be a defense if the landlord was not in compliance with failed to 
substantially comply with O.M.C. 8.22.510 at the time the notice terminating tenancy 
was served. 
8. When a landlord seeks to evict a tenant under Subsection 6(A)(9) or (10) [8.22.360 
A.9, 10], it shall be an affirmative defense if any child under the age of 18 enrolled in a 
school or any educator resides in the unit, the child or educator is a tenant in the unit or 
has a custodial or family relationship with a tenant in the unit, the tenant has resided in 
the unit for at least 90 days, and the effective date of the notice of termination of tenancy 
falls during the regular school year of the Oakland Unified School District. 
 
a.   For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the 
following meanings: 
 
i.  “Custodial  relationship”  means  that  the  person  is  a  legal  
guardian  of  the   child, has a court-recognized caregiver  
authorization  affidavit for the child, or has provided full-time 
custodial care of the child pursuant to an agreement with the child’s  
legal guardian or court-recognized caregiver and has been providing 
that care for at least one year or half of the child’s   lifetime, whichever 
is less. 
 
14 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
ii.  “Educator” means any person who works on-site at a school in 
Oakland as an employee of the school or of the Oakland Unified 
School District, including, without limitation, all teachers, classroom 
and student support providers,  school  administrators  and  
administrative  staff, counselors, social  workers,  school  health  
services  workers,  speech  pathologists, custodial or maintenance 
workers, nutrition and/or food services workers, library services 
workers, child welfare workers, and attendance liaisons. 
 
iii.  “Family relationship” means that the person is the parent, 
grandparent, sibling, niece, nephew, aunt, or uncle of the child or 
educator, or the spouse or domestic partner of such relation. 
iv.  “School” for purposes of this Section means any state-licensed child 
care center, state-licensed family child care home, accredited 
community or junior college, and/or any public, private, or 
parochial institution that provides educational instruction for students 
in any or all of the grades from kindergarten through twelfth grade. 
9.  Nonpayment of rent during COVID-19 pandemic. In an any unlawful detainer action 
based on nonpayment of rent or late fees that accrued between March 9, 2020, and July 
14, 2023, it shall be a defense that the rent was late or unpaid because of a substantial 
reduction in household income or substantial increase in expenses resulting from the 
Coronavirus pandemic. Any notice demanding rent or late fees that accrued during this 
time period must: 
a. be served together with a form developed by the Rent Adjustment Program 
that, among other things, allows the tenant to indicate that the financial 
hardship defense applies; and  
b. include the following statement in bold underlined 12-point font: “If you were 
unable to pay the rent or other fees demanded in this notice due to a substantial 
reduction in household income or substantial increase in expenses as a result of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, you may raise this as a defense to any eviction action 
based on this notice.”  
E. In the event that new state or federal legislation confers a right upon landlords to evict 
tenants for a reason not stated herein, evictions proceeding under such legislation shall 
conform to the specifications set out in this Chapter [O.M.C. Chapter 8.22, Article II].  
F. The City Council is authorized to modify the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance (Measure 
EE, O.M.C., Chapter 8, Article II (8.22.300 et seq.)) for the purpose of adding limitations 
on a landlord's right to evict, but the City Council may not modify any exemption from the 
ordinance from which this section is derived contained in Section 8.22.350.  
 
 SECTION 8.  Outreach.  City Council directs the City  Administrator to conduct robust 
outreach, education, and support to tenants and property owners about the pr ovisions of this 
legislation. 
 
15 
3258377v2/BXS 
 
SECTION 9 .  Direction to the City Administrator.  City Council directs the City 
Administrator to prioritize the filling of vacant, budgeted positions in the Housing and 
Community Development Department that help ensure services to promote housing stability. 
These vacant, budgeted positions include: the fo llowing positions in the Rental Adjustment 
Program — one (1) Rental Adjustment Program Assistant Manager, two (2) Program Analysts 
II, one (1) Administrative Analyst I, and one (1) Administrative Assistant, as well as one (1) 
Monitoring Supervisory and Pro gram Analyst II in the Community Development and 
Engagement unit. These positions are supported by dedicated funds, not the General Purpose 
Fund. City Council also directs the City Administrator to seek additional financial resources to 
address the economic and housing impacts of COVID-19 on tenants and property owners. 
 
SECTION 10.  Severability.  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of 
this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by decision of any court of 
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of  the 
Chapter.  The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and each 
section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that one or more other 
sections, subsections, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.  
 
SECTION 11.  Effective Date.  This ordinance shall become effective immediately on 
final adoption if it receives six or more affirmative votes; otherwise it shall become effective 
upon the seventh day after final adoption. 
 
SECTION 12.  D irections to Rent Board.   The City Council directs the City 
Administrator to work with the Rent Board to revise the Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance 
Regulations to implement the newly-added Just Cause provisions. 
 
 
 
IN COUNCIL, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA, 
 
PASSED BY THE FOLLOWING VOTE: 
 
AYES – FIFE, GALLO, JENKINS, KALB, KAPLAN, RAMACHANDRAN, REID, AND 
 PRESIDENT FORTUNATO BAS 
 
NOES – 
ABSENT –  
ABSTENTION – 
 
ATTEST:        
ASHA REED 
City Clerk and Clerk of the Council of the 
City of Oakland, California 
 
 
Date of Attestation:        
 
3258377v2/BXS   
 
NOTICE AND DIGEST 
 
ORDINANCE ESTABLISHI NG A TIMELINE FOR TE RMINATION OF 
THE MORATORIUM ON RE SIDENTIAL EVICTIONS,  RENT 
INCREASES, AND LATE FEES ENACTED IN RESP ONSE TO THE 
COVID-19 PANDEMIC (O RDINANCE NOS. 13589 C.M.S., 13594 C.M.S. , 
13606 C.M.S.); AND A MENDING THE JUST CAU SE FOR EVICTION 
ORDINANCE TO: (1) PE RMANENTLY CODIFY CER TAIN 
PROTECTIONS ESTABLIS HED BY THE MORATORIU M; (2) 
PROHIBIT EVICTIONS BASED ON NON-PAYMENT OF RENT WHERE 
THE AMOUNT DEMANDED IS LESS THAN ONE MON TH OF HUD 
FAIR MARKET RENT; (3) CONFORM OCCUPANCY LI MITATIONS 
TO STATE LAW; (4) MAKE OTHER NON -SUBSTANTIVE 
CLARIFYING AMENDMENTS  
 
This Ordinance would establish a timeline for ending the moratorium on residential 
evictions, rent increase s, and late fees  that has been in effect since March 27, 2020, in 
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The current eviction moratorium prohibits most forms 
of residential evictions and is scheduled to end when the Local Emergency is terminated by 
City Council —a date that remains uncertain. This Ordinance would terminate the evictio n 
and late fee moratoriums as of July 15, 2023. The Ordinance would terminate the rent 
increase moratorium as of July 1, 2024. Permanent amendments to the Just Cause for 
Eviction Ordinance (O.M.C. 8.22.300 et seq.) include: codification of the defense for 
nonpayment of rent accrued during the moratorium that was unpaid due to pandemic -related 
reasons; limiting nonpayment evictions where the amount demanded is less than one month 
of HUD fair market rent; conformity of occupancy standards to state  law; and other non -
substantive clarifications. 
 
 
 
 
 