SOURCE: https://assets-002.noviams.com/novi-file-uploads/ebrha/pdfs-and-documents/ordinance_no__13581_c_m_s__o_m_c__8_25-cc6d7722.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03T19:35Z

FILE 0
of net: or t he cn \ ctOAKLAND
INTRODUCED BY VICE MAYOR LARRY REID,
COUNCILMEMBER NIKKI FORTUNATO BASiinn 1**190 DM 1. IQ 
PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE DAN KALB,
COUNCILMEMBER MCELHANEY, AND 
CITY ATTORNEY BARBARA J. PARKER
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY
City Attorney’s Office
REVISED IN COMMITTEE
OAKLAND CITY COUNCIL
A JSS
7 C.M.S.ORDINANCE NO.
RONALD V. DELLUMS AND SIMBARASHE SHERRY FAIR CHANCE 
ACCESS TO HOUSING ORDINANCE ADDING OAKLAND MUNICIPAL 
CODE CHAPTER 8.25 PROHIBITING CONSIDERATION OF CRIMINAL 
HISTORIES IN SCREENING APPLICATIONS FOR RENTAL HOUSING
WHEREAS, mass incarceration is a national crisis and restoring the rights of 
people affected by mass incarceration is a national priority;
WHEREAS, the U.S. Department of Justice has estimated one in every three 
adults in the United States has either an arrest or conviction record; and
WHEREAS, the Center for American Progress reports that nearly half of all 
children in the United States have at least one parent with a criminal record; and
WHEREAS, studies have found that private criminal databases pull source 
information from inadequate records and lack accountability procedures to ensure that 
the database records provided to Housing Providers are accurate. Many housing 
providers in conducting criminal background checks are relying on such inaccurate 
information in evaluating housing applications; and
WHEREAS, formerly incarcerated persons face barriers to access to both private 
rental and publicly subsidized affordable housing; and
WHEREAS, homelessness is a critical issue in Oakland and formerly 
incarcerated people are disproportionately affected by homelessness, which can 
prevent a formerly incarcerated person from getting a job, from visiting with their 
children, and from fulfilling other needs that are fundamental to reintegrating with 
community after incarceration; and
WHEREAS, the unmet housing needs of formerly incarcerated people in 
Oakland are an acute challenge to the dignity, public health and safety, and equal

opportunity for this population and the broader community; and
WHEREAS, research has found that access to housing reduces recidivism, and 
the lack of housing can be a significant barrier to successful reintegration after 
incarceration; and
WHEREAS, reliance on criminal history to select tenants impedes formerly 
incarcerated persons from gaining access to housing in the City of Oakland, to the 
detriment of health, welfare, and public safety of the City’s residents; and
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OAKLAND DOES 
ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. Addition of Chapter 8.25, Article 
Code. The City Council hereby adopts the addition of Chapter 8.25, Article I to the 
Oakland Municipal Code, as follows:
to the Oakland Municipal
Article I - Ronald V. Dellums and Simbarashe Sherry Fair Chance Access 
to Housing Ordinance
8.25.010 - Title, Purpose, and Application
This Article I shall be known as the “Ronald V. Dellums and Simbarashe Sherry 
Fair Chance Access to Housing Ordinance” and may be shortened to the “Fair 
Chance Housing Ordinance.” (The term “this Article” and ’’this Ordinance” may be 
used interchangeably to refer to the Ron V. Dellums and Simbarashe Sherry Fair 
Chance Access to Housing Ordinance as set forth in this Article.)
A.
B. The purpose of this Article is to limit the use of criminal history in tenant selection 
policies in order to give previously incarcerated persons or other persons with a 
criminal history a fair opportunity to compete for rental housing and to be able to 
reside with family members and others, thus putting them in a better position to 
reintegrate into the Community and to obtain gainful employment. Such housing 
opportunities should also reduce the incidence of homelessness for persons with a 
criminal history. Further, the recitals set forth in the adopted form of this Ordinance, 
are incorporated into this Article as if fully set forth herein.
8.25.020 - Definitions
“Adverse Action” means (1) to fail or refuse to rent or lease Housing to an 
individual; (2) to fail or refuse to continue to rent or lease Housing to an individual; 
(3) to reduce the amount or term of any tenant subsidy for Housing; (4) to treat an 
individual differently from other applicants or tenants such as requiring higher 
security deposit or rent; (5) to treat an individual as ineligible for a tenant-based 
rental assistance program, including, but not limited to, the Section 8 Housing 
Choice Voucher Program, or (6) to fail to permit the addition of a tenant’s Close 
Family Member to occupy a rental unit while the occupying tenant remains in
A.
2
2891857v2

occupancy, based on Criminal History.
“Affordable Housing” shall mean any Housing that (i) has received or is receiving 
City, County, State, or Federal funding, tax credits, or other subsidies connected in 
whole or in part to developing, rehabilitating, restricting rents, subsidizing 
ownership, or otherwise providing rental housing for extremely low income, very 
low income, low income, and moderate income households (collectively, “Public 
Funding”), with the exception of Housing where the only Public Funding received is 
in the form of a Local, State or Federal tenant-based voucher, such as through the 
Section 8 tenant-based voucher program (42 U.S.C. Section 1437f); or (ii) is 
subject to affordability and related requirements including, but not limited to, the 
State Density Bonus law (California Government Code Sections 65915-65918 and 
OMC Section 17.107.040).
"Affordable Housing Provider" shall mean any Housing Provider that owns, master 
leases, manages, or develops Affordable Housing in the City. Any agent, such as a 
property management company, that makes tenancy decisions on behalf of the 
above-described Housing Providers shall also be considered an “Affordable 
Housing Provider".
i
“Aggrieved Person” means an Applicant who believes they were subject to an 
Adverse Action; a tenant who believes they or their Close Family Member was 
subject to an Adverse Action at their rental unit based on the application of an 
Applicant to reside in such family member’s rental unit; and a tenant who believes 
they were subject to an Adverse Action based on the application of a person to 
reside in such tenant’s rental unit to replace an existing tenant, add a new tenant, 
or to sublet.
B.
C.
D.
E. "Applicant" means a person who seeks information about, visits or applies to rent 
or lease Housing, who applies for a tenant-based rental assistance program, 
including, but not limited to, the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program, who 
seeks to be added as a household member to an existing lease for Housing or, 
with respect to any Criminal History that occurred prior to the beginning of the 
person's tenancy, who currently rents or has a lease for Housing.
“Arrest” means a record from any jurisdiction that does not result in a Conviction 
and includes information indicating that a person has been questioned, 
apprehended, taken into custody or detained, or held for investigation by a law 
enforcement, police, or prosecutorial agency and/or charged with, indicted, or tried 
and acquitted for any felony, misdemeanor or other criminal offense.
“Background Check Report” means any report regarding an Applicant’s Criminal 
History, including, but not limited to, those produced by the California Department 
of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, other law enforcement agencies, 
courts, or by any consumer reporting or tenant screening agency:
F.
G.
H. “Close Family Member” means a spouse, domestic partner, child, sibling, parent.
3
2891857v2

grandparent, or grandchild.
“Conviction” means a record from any jurisdiction that includes information 
indicating that a person has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor or other 
criminal offense and for which the person was placed on probation, fined, 
imprisoned and/or paroled.
I.
J. “Criminal History” means information transmitted orally or in writing or by any other 
means, and obtained from any source, including, but not limited to, the individual to 
whom the information pertains, a government agency or a Background Check 
Report, regarding: one or more Convictions or Arrests; a Conviction that has been 
sealed, dismissed, vacated, expunged, sealed, voided, invalidated, or otherwise 
rendered inoperative by judicial action or by statute (for example, under California 
Penal Code sections 1203.1 or 1203.4); a determination or adjudication in the 
juvenile justice system; a matter considered in or processed through the juvenile 
justice system; or participation in or completion of a diversion or a deferral of 
judgment program.
K. “Housing” means any residential rental housing, building, or unit, whether legally 
permitted or not, in the City of Oakland, with the exception of the following:
Single-family dwellings where the owner occupies the dwelling as his or her 
principal residence;
1.
A dwelling unit in a residential property that is divided into a maximum of 
three (3) units, one of which is occupied by the owner as his or her principal 
residence;
2.
Units where the owner has previously occupied the rental unit as his or her 
principal residence and has the right to recover possession for his or her 
occupancy as a principal residence under a written rental agreement with the 
current tenants; and
3.
Tenant-occupied units where an occupying tenant seeks to replace an 
existing co-tenant, add an additional co-tenant, or sublet the unit, provided 
that the occupying tenant remains in occupancy.
4.
L. “Housing Provider” shall mean any Person that owns, master leases, manages, or 
develops Housing in the City. For the purpose of this definition, “Person” includes 
one or more individuals, partnerships, organizations, trade or professional 
associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, 
receivers, or any political or civil subdivision or agency or instrumentality of the 
City. In addition, any agent, such as a property management company, that makes 
tenancy decisions on behalf of the above-described Persons, and any government 
agency, including, but not limited to, the Oakland Housing Authority, that makes 
eligibility decisions for tenant-based rental assistance programs, including, but not
4
2891857V2

limited to, the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program, shall also be 
considered a “Housing Provider”.
Use of Criminal History in Housing Decisions8.25.030
Except as provided in paragraphs B and C of this section, a Housing Provider shall 
not, at any time or by any means, whether direct or indirect, inquire about an 
Applicant’s Criminal History, require an Applicant to disclose Criminal History, 
require an Applicant to authorize the release of Criminal History or, if such 
information is received, base an Adverse Action in whole or in part on an 
Applicant’s Criminal History.
A.
It shall not be a violation of this Ordinance for a Housing Provider to comply with 
Federal or State laws that require the Housing Provider to automatically exclude 
tenants based on certain types of criminal history, e.g. Ineligibility of Dangerous 
Sex Offenders for Admission to Public Housing (42 U.S.C. Sec. 13663(a)) and 
Ineligibility of Individuals Convicted for Manufacturing Methamphetamine on 
Premises of Federally Assisted Housing for Admission to Public Housing and 
Housing Choice Voucher Programs (24 C.F.R. Sec. 982.553)). However, if such a 
requirement applies, the Housing Provider shall not inquire about, require 
disclosure of, or, if such information is received, review an Applicant’s Criminal 
History until the Housing Provider first does the following: (1) informs the Applicant 
in advance that the Housing Provider will check for certain types of criminal history; 
and (2) requests written consent, or if the Applicant objects, provides the Applicant 
the opportunity to withdraw the rental application.
B.
The denial of Housing may only be based on State and Federal requirements.
C. In compliance with state law, in order to protect persons at risk pursuant to Penal 
Code Section 290.46(j)(1), the Housing Provider may review the State registry of 
lifetime sex offenders operated by the State of California Department of Justice, 
provided that (1) the Housing Provider has stated the lifetime sex offender 
■ screening requirement in writing in the rental application; and (2) the Housing 
Provider may not inquire about, require disclosure of, or, if such information is 
received, review an Applicant’s Criminal History until the Housing Provider has 
first:
1. Determined that the Applicant is qualified to rent the Housing under all of the 
Housing Provider’s criteria for assessing Applicants except for any criteria 
related to Criminal History; and
2. Provided to the Applicant a conditional rental agreement that commits to 
providing the Housing to the Applicant as long as the Applicant meets the 
Housing Provider's Criminal History criteria with respect to the registry of 
lifetime sex offenders.
3. Informed the Applicant in advance that the Housing Provider will be checking
5
2891857V2

the sex offender registry and requested written consent or if the Applicant 
objects provided the opportunity to withdraw the rental application.
D. If any Adverse Action is based in whole or in part on the Applicant’s Criminal 
History, the Housing Provider shall provide a written notice to the Applicant 
regarding the Adverse Action that includes, at a minimum, the reason(s) for the 
Adverse Action; instructions regarding how to file a complaint about the Adverse 
Action with the City, a list of local legal services providers including contact 
information; and a copy of any Criminal History, Background Check Report, or 
other information related to the Applicant’s Criminal History that served as a basis 
for the Adverse Action, and an opportunity to respond with rebutting or mitigating 
information prior to the denial of Applicant’s housing application. The Housing 
Provider shall not require reimbursement or payment from the Applicant for 
providing any Criminal History or Criminal Background Check Report.
8.25.040 Requirements  for Housing Providers
A. It shall be unlawful for any Housing Provider, to produce or disseminate any 
advertisement related to Housing that expresses, directly or indirectly, that any 
person with Criminal History will not be considered for the rental or lease of real 
property or may not apply for the rental or lease of real property, except as 
required by State or Federal law.
B. The City shall publish and make available to Housing Providers, in English, 
Spanish, and all languages spoken by more than five percent (5%) of the City’s 
population, a notice suitable for posting that informs Applicants for Housing of their 
rights under this Ordinance. The notice shall contain the following information:
1. A description of the restrictions and requirements of this Ordinance;
2. Instructions for submitting a complaint to the City regarding a violation of this 
Ordinance; and
3. Information about community resources available to assist an Applicant in 
connection with a violation of the Ordinance.
C. Housing Providers shall include the notice described in Section 8.25.040.B 
prominently on their application materials, websites and at any locations under 
their control that are frequently visited by Applicants.
D. Housing Providers shall maintain a record of any Criminal History obtained for any 
Applicant for Housing for a period of at least three years. To the maximum extent 
permitted by law, any information obtained regarding an Applicant’s Criminal 
History shall remain confidential.
E. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a Housing Provider from complying with a
6
2891857v2

request by the City to provide records for purposes of demonstrating compliance 
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
F. In addition to the requirements in Paragraphs A-E of this section, Affordable 
Housing Providers shall also submit to the City an annual certificate of compliance 
with the requirements of this Ordinance in the form provided by the City.
8.25.050 Retaliation Prohibited
It shall be a violation of this Article to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or 
the attempt to exercise, any right protected under this Chapter, or to take any Adverse 
Action against any Person because the Person exercised or attempted in good faith to 
exercise any right protected under this Article.
8.25.060 Remedies
A. Administrative Remedies. For any violation of this Ordinance the City may take the 
following administrative actions:
Issue a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation.1.
2. Recover the costs of any investigation or issuance of civil penalties.
3. Issue a warning letter and assess costs in lieu of issuing a civil penalty for a 
violation.
Any Aggrieved Person who believes an Adverse Action was based on a violation of 
this Ordinance shall have the right to submit a complaint to the City. The City shall 
review the complaint and any evidence submitted by the Aggrieved Person. The 
City may, at its sole discretion, conduct an investigation that may include 
interviewing witnesses, reviewing documents and records, and any other lawful 
and reasonable investigative actions.
B.
C. If, upon review of the evidence submitted by the Aggrieved Person and any other 
evidence discovered during the course of review or investigation, the City finds that 
a violation occurred, the City may take administrative action pursuant to paragraph
A.
D. All records submitted to or obtained by the City containing any criminal history or 
background check report of any Aggrieved Person shall be kept confidential to the 
extent permissible by law.
E. Penalties and costs assessed under this Ordinance may be recovered by all 
appropriate legal means including but not limited to civil and small claims action 
brought by the City.
7
2891857v2

F. Civil Remedies. A civil action to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance may be 
brought by:
Any Aggrieved Person;1.
The City Attorney; or2.
Any organization that:3.
a. Has tax exempt status under 26 United States Code Section 501(c)(3) or 
501(c)(4); and
b. Has a mission of protecting the rights of tenants or incarcerated persons in 
Oakland or Alameda County; and
c. Will fairly and adequately represent the interests of the Aggrieved Person.
Equitable Relief. Any Housing Provider who commits, proposes to commit, or aids 
another in committing an act that violates this Ordinance may be enjoined 
therefrom by any court of competent jurisdiction. The court may also award any 
further relief it deems proper.
G.
H. Civil Damages. Any Housing Provider who violates, and any person who aids a 
Housing Provider to violate, any provision of this Ordinance shall be liable for the 
following monetary damages:
1. In any action brought by any Aggrieved Person or entity authorized to bring 
such action under subsection F.3., above, the Housing Provider shall be liable 
for three times the greater of either: a) actual damages, including damages 
for mental or emotional distress,' b) one month’s rent that the Housing 
Provider charges for the rental unit in question, or c) the HUD Small Area Fair 
Market Rent of such Rental Unit.
The court may award punitive damages in a proper case as set out in Civil 
Code Section 3294 and pursuant to the standards set forth in that Code 
Section or any successor thereto, but may not award both punitive damages 
and treble damages.
2.
Attorney’s Fees and Costs. The Aggrieved Person or entity authorized to 
bring such action under subsection F.3., above, may recover costs and 
reasonable attorney’s fees. The Housing Provider may recover attorney’s 
fees if the action brought is found by the Court to be frivolous and without 
merit.
3.
4. The City Attorney may file an action against a Housing Provider that the City 
Attorney believes has violated provisions of this Ordinance. Such an action 
may include requests for civil penalties of up to $1,000 per violation, equitable
8
2891857v2

relief (e.g., injunctions and restitution), and recovery of costs and reasonable 
attorney's fees. The City Attorney has sole discretion to determine whether to 
bring such an action.
Criminal Penalties
Infraction. Any Housing Provider who violates, or any person who aids a 
Housing Provider to violate, any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of 
an infraction for the first offense.
1.
2. Misdemeanor. Any Housing Provider who knowingly and willfully violates, or 
any person who knowingly and willfully aids a Housing Provider to violate, any 
provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
i
J. General Remedies. The remedies available in this Ordinance are not exclusive and 
may be used cumulatively with any other remedies in this Ordinance or at law.
8.25.070 Regulations
The City Administrator is authorized to create and amend regulations and forms 
consistent with this Article.
No Conflict with State or Federal Law8.25.080
This Article is not intended to conflict with state or federal law. If there is a conflict 
between the provisions of federal or state law and this Article, federal or state law shall 
control.
SECTION 2. This Ordinance shall become effectiveEffective Date.
immediately on final adoption if it receives six or more affirmative votes; otherwise it 
shall become effective upon the seventh day after final adoption.
SECTION 3. Notice to Housing Providers. The City Administer is directed to 
cause notice of this Ordinance to be mailed to all residential rental property owners, 
according to the business tax certification records of the Revenue Management Bureau, 
within 90 days of final adoption of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. Enforcement. A Housing Provider shall not be liable under Section 
8.22.060 for a violation within 180 days after final adoption of this Ordinance, unless the 
Housing Provider has first received a warning letter from the City regarding a violation of 
the Ordinance. In addition, the City Administrator or designee shall provide annual 
public reports to the City Council on the implementation and enforcement of this 
Ordinance. The annual reports shall include, at a minimum: information from the annual 
. compliance certifications submitted by Affordable Housing Providers; the number of 
complaints filed with the City regarding violations of this Ordinance and the outcomes of 
such complaints; the number of notices filed with the City regarding private court actions 
brought under the Ordinance and the outcomes of such court proceedings.
9
2891857v2

SECTION 5. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or 
phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by 
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity 
of the remaining portions of the Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would 
have passed this Ordinance and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof 
irrespective of the fact that one or more other sections, subsections, clauses or phrases 
may be declared invalid or unconstitutional
SECTION 6. CEQA Exemption. This action is exempt from the California 
Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”) pursuant to, but not limited to, the following CEQA 
Guidelines: § 15378 (regulatory actions), § 15061(b)(3) (no significant environmental 
impact), and § 15183 (consistent with the general plan and zoning).
FIB 0 4 2020IN COUNCIL, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA,
PASSED BY THE FOLLOWING VOTE:
AYES- FORTUNATO BAS, 
KAPLAN
fGIBSON MCELHANEY, KALB, REID, TAYLOR, THAO AND PRESIDENTwmt
NOES- fl
1ABSENT-
ABSTENTION -p
ATTEST:
City Clerk and Clerk 6f ^Council of the 
City of Oakland, California
Date of Attestation:
Introduction Date
m 2 1 2020
10
2891857v2

NOTICE AND DIGEST
RONALD V. DELLUMS AND SIMBARASHE SHERRY FAIR CHANCE 
ACCESS TO HOUSING ORDINANCE ADDING OAKLAND MUNICIPAL 
CODE CHAPTER 8.25 PROHIBITING CONSIDERATION OF CRIMINAL 
HISTORIES IN SCREENING APPLICATIONS FOR RENTAL HOUSING
This Ordinance adds a new Oakland Municipal Code Chapter 8.25 that 
prohibits the consideration of criminal histories in screening applications for rental 
housing.
